1|1|In the Name of God—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful
1|2|All praise is for God—Lord of all worlds
1|3|the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful
1|4|Master of the Day of Judgment
1|5|You ˹alone˺ we worship and You ˹alone˺ we ask for help
1|6|Guide us along the Straight Path
1|7|the Path of those You have blessed—not those You are displeased with, or those who are astray
2|1|Alif-Lãm-Mĩm
2|2|This is the Book! There is no doubt about it—a guide for those mindful ˹of God˺
2|3|who believe in the unseen, establish prayer, and donate from what We have provided for them
2|4|and who believe in what has been revealed to you ˹O Prophet˺ and what was revealed before you, and have sure faith in the Hereafter
2|5|It is they who are ˹truly˺ guided by their Lord, and it is they who will be successful
2|6|As for those who persist in disbelief, it is the same whether you warn them or not—they will never believe
2|7|God has sealed their hearts and their hearing, and their sight is covered. They will suffer a tremendous punishment
2|8|And there are some who say, “We believe in God and the Last Day,” yet they are not ˹true˺ believers
2|9|They seek to deceive God and the believers, yet they only deceive themselves, but they fail to perceive it
2|10|There is sickness in their hearts, and God ˹only˺ lets their sickness increase. They will suffer a painful punishment for their lies
2|11|When they are told, “Do not spread corruption in the land,” they reply, “We are only peace-makers!”
2|12|Indeed, it is they who are the corruptors, but they fail to perceive it
2|13|And when they are told, “Believe as others believe,” they reply, “Will we believe as the fools believe?” Indeed, it is they who are fools, but they do not know
2|14|When they meet the believers they say, “We believe.” But when alone with their evil associates they say, “We are definitely with you; we were only mocking.”
2|15|God will throw their mockery back at them, leaving them to continue wandering blindly in their defiance
2|16|They are the ones who trade guidance for misguidance. But this trade is profitless, and they are not ˹rightly˺ guided
2|17|Their example is that of someone who kindles a fire, but when it lights up all around them, God takes away their light, leaving them in complete darkness—unable to see
2|18|They are ˹wilfully˺ deaf, dumb, and blind, so they will never return ˹to the Right Path˺
2|19|Or ˹those caught in˺ a rainstorm from the sky with darkness, thunder, and lightning. They press their fingers into their ears at the sound of every thunder-clap for fear of death. And God encompasses the disbelievers ˹by His might˺
2|20|It is as if the lightning were about to snatch away their sight. Whenever lightning strikes, they walk in its light, but when darkness covers them, they stand still. Had God willed, He could have taken away their hearing and sight. Surely God is Most Capable of everything
2|21|O humanity! Worship your Lord, Who created you and those before you, so that you may become mindful ˹of Him˺
2|22|˹He is the One˺ Who has made the earth a place of settlement for you and the sky a canopy; and sends down rain from the sky, causing fruits to grow as a provision for you. So do not knowingly set up equals to God ˹in worship˺
2|23|And if you are in doubt about what We have revealed to Our servant, then produce a sûrah like it and call your helpers other than God, if what you say is true
2|24|But if you are unable to do so—and you will never be able to do so—then fear the Fire fuelled with people and stones, which is prepared for the disbelievers
2|25|Give good news ˹O Prophet˺ to those who believe and do good that they will have Gardens under which rivers flow. Whenever provided with fruit, they will say, “This is what we were given before,” for they will be served fruit that looks similar ˹but tastes different˺. They will have pure spouses, and they will be there forever
2|26|Surely God does not shy away from using the parable of a mosquito or what is even smaller. As for the believers, they know that it is the truth from their Lord. And as for the disbelievers, they argue, “What does God mean by such a parable?” Through this ˹test˺, He leaves many to stray, and guides many. And He leaves none to stray except the rebellious—
2|27|those who violate God’s covenant after it has been affirmed, break whatever ˹ties˺ God has ordered to be maintained, and spread corruption in the land. It is they who are the ˹true˺ losers
2|28|How can you deny God? You were lifeless and He gave you life, then He will cause you to die and again bring you to life, and then to Him you will ˹all˺ be returned
2|29|He is the One Who created everything in the earth for you. Then He turned towards the heaven, forming it into seven heavens. And He has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all things
2|30|˹Remember˺ when your Lord said to the angels, “I am going to place a successive ˹human˺ authority on earth.” They asked ˹God˺, “Will You place in it someone who will spread corruption there and shed blood while we glorify Your praises and proclaim Your holiness?” God responded, “I know what you do not know.”
2|31|He taught Adam the names of all things, then He presented them to the angels and said, “Tell Me the names of these, if what you say is true?”
2|32|They replied, “Glory be to You! We have no knowledge except what You have taught us. You are truly the All-Knowing, All-Wise.”
2|33|God said, “O Adam! Inform them of their names.” Then when Adam did, God said, “Did I not tell you that I know the secrets of the heavens and the earth, and I know what you reveal and what you conceal?”
2|34|And ˹remember˺ when We said to the angels, “Prostrate before Adam,” so they all did—but not Iblîs, who refused and acted arrogantly, becoming unfaithful
2|35|We cautioned, “O Adam! Live with your wife in Paradise and eat as freely as you please, but do not approach this tree, or else you will be wrongdoers.”
2|36|But Satan deceived them—leading to their fall from the ˹blissful˺ state they were in, and We said, “Descend from the heavens ˹to the earth˺ as enemies to each other. You will find in the earth a residence and provision for your appointed stay.”
2|37|Then Adam was inspired with words ˹of prayer˺ by his Lord, so He accepted his repentance. Surely He is the Accepter of Repentance, Most Merciful
2|38|We said, “Descend all of you! Then when guidance comes to you from Me, whoever follows it, there will be no fear for them, nor will they grieve
2|39|But those who disbelieve and deny Our signs will be the residents of the Fire. They will be there forever.”
2|40|O children of Israel! Remember My favours upon you. Fulfil your covenant and I will fulfil Mine, and stand in awe of Me ˹alone˺
2|41|Believe in My revelations which confirm your Scriptures. Do not be the first to deny them or trade them for a fleeting gain. And be mindful of Me
2|42|Do not mix truth with falsehood or hide the truth knowingly
2|43|Establish prayer, pay alms-tax, and bow down with those who bow down
2|44|Do you preach righteousness and fail to practice it yourselves, although you read the Scripture? Do you not understand
2|45|And seek help through patience and prayer. Indeed, it is a burden except for the humble—
2|46|those who are certain that they will meet their Lord and to Him they will return
2|47|O Children of Israel! Remember ˹all˺ the favours I granted you and how I honoured you above the others
2|48|Guard yourselves against the Day on which no soul will be of help to another. No intercession will be accepted, no ransom taken, and no help will be given
2|49|˹Remember˺ how We delivered you from the people of Pharaoh, who afflicted you with dreadful torment, slaughtering your sons and keeping your women. That was a severe test from your Lord
2|50|And ˹remember˺ when We parted the sea, rescued you, and drowned Pharaoh’s people before your very eyes
2|51|And ˹remember˺ when We appointed forty nights for Moses, then you worshipped the calf in his absence, acting wrongfully
2|52|Even then We ˹still˺ forgave you so perhaps you would be grateful
2|53|And ˹remember˺ when We gave Moses the Scripture—the standard ˹to distinguish between right and wrong˺ that perhaps you would be ˹rightly˺ guided
2|54|And ˹remember˺ when Moses said to his people, “O my people! Surely you have wronged yourselves by worshipping the calf, so turn in repentance to your Creator and execute ˹the calf-worshippers among˺ yourselves. That is best for you in the sight of your Creator.” Then He accepted your repentance. Surely He is the Accepter of Repentance, Most Merciful
2|55|And ˹remember˺ when you said, “O Moses! We will never believe you until we see God with our own eyes,” so a thunderbolt struck you while you were looking on
2|56|Then We brought you back to life after your death, so that perhaps you would be grateful
2|57|And ˹remember when˺ We shaded you with clouds and sent down to you manna and quails, ˹saying˺, “Eat from the good things We have provided for you.” The evildoers ˹certainly˺ did not wrong Us, but wronged themselves
2|58|And ˹remember˺ when We said, “Enter this city and eat freely from wherever you please; enter the gate with humility, saying, ‘Absolve us.’ We will forgive your sins and multiply the reward for the good-doers.”
2|59|But the wrongdoers changed the words they were commanded to say. So We sent down a punishment from the heavens upon them for their rebelliousness
2|60|And ˹remember˺ when Moses prayed for water for his people, We said, “Strike the rock with your staff.” Then twelve springs gushed out, ˹and˺ each tribe knew its drinking place. ˹We then said,˺ “Eat and drink of God’s provisions, and do not go about spreading corruption in the land.”
2|61|And ˹remember˺ when you said, “O Moses! We cannot endure the same meal ˹every day˺. So ˹just˺ call upon your Lord on our behalf, He will bring forth for us some of what the earth produces of herbs, cucumbers, garlic, lentils, and onions.” Moses scolded ˹them˺, “Do you exchange what is better for what is worse? ˹You can˺ go down to any village and you will find what you have asked for.” They were stricken with disgrace and misery, and they invited the displeasure of God for rejecting God’s signs and unjustly killing the prophets. This is ˹a fair reward˺ for their disobedience and violations
2|62|Indeed, the believers, Jews, Christians, and Sabians—whoever ˹truly˺ believes in God and the Last Day and does good will have their reward with their Lord. And there will be no fear for them, nor will they grieve
2|63|And ˹remember˺ when We took a covenant from you and raised the mountain above you ˹saying˺, “Hold firmly to that ˹Scripture˺ which We have given you and observe its teachings so perhaps you will become mindful ˹of God˺.”
2|64|Yet you turned away afterwards. Had it not been for God’s grace and mercy upon you, you would have certainly been of the losers
2|65|You are already aware of those of you who broke the Sabbath. We said to them, “Be disgraced apes!”
2|66|So We made their fate an example to present and future generations, and a lesson to the God-fearing
2|67|And ˹remember˺ when Moses said to his people, “God commands you to sacrifice a cow.” They replied, “Are you mocking us?” Moses responded, “I seek refuge in God from acting foolishly!”
2|68|They said, “Call upon your Lord to clarify for us what type ˹of cow˺ it should be!” He replied, “God says, ‘The cow should neither be old nor young but in between. So do as you are commanded!’”
2|69|They said, “Call upon your Lord to specify for us its colour.” He replied, “God says, ‘It should be a bright yellow cow—pleasant to see.’”
2|70|Again they said, “Call upon your Lord so that He may make clear to us which cow, for all cows look the same to us. Then, God willing, we will be guided ˹to the right one˺.”
2|71|He replied, “God says, ‘It should have been used neither to till the soil nor water the fields; wholesome and without blemish.’” They said, “Now you have come with the truth.” Yet they still slaughtered it hesitantly
2|72|˹This is˺ when a man was killed and you disputed who the killer was, but God revealed what you concealed
2|73|So We instructed, “Strike the dead body with a piece of the cow.” This is how ˹easily˺ God brings the dead to life, showing you His signs so that you may understand
2|74|Even then your hearts became hardened like a rock or even harder, for some rocks gush rivers; others split, spilling water; while others are humbled in awe of God. And God is never unaware of what you do
2|75|Do you ˹believers still˺ expect them to be true to you, though a group of them would hear the word of God then knowingly corrupt it after understanding it
2|76|When they meet the believers they say, “We believe.” But in private they say ˹to each other˺, “Will you disclose to the believers the knowledge God has revealed to you, so that they may use it against you before your Lord? Do you not understand?”
2|77|Do they not know that God is aware of what they conceal and what they reveal
2|78|And among them are the illiterate who know nothing about the Scripture except lies, and ˹so˺ they ˹wishfully˺ speculate
2|79|So woe to those who distort the Scripture with their own hands then say, “This is from God”—seeking a fleeting gain! So woe to them for what their hands have written, and woe to them for what they have earned
2|80|˹Some of˺ the Jews claim, “The Fire will not touch us except for a number of days.” Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Have you taken a pledge from God—for God never breaks His word—or are you ˹just˺ saying about God what you do not know?”
2|81|But no! Those who commit evil and are engrossed in sin will be the residents of the Fire. They will be there forever
2|82|And those who believe and do good will be the residents of Paradise. They will be there forever
2|83|And ˹remember˺ when We took a covenant from the children of Israel ˹stating˺, “Worship none but God; be kind to parents, relatives, orphans and the needy; speak kindly to people; establish prayer; and pay alms-tax.” But you ˹Israelites˺ turned away—except for a few of you—and were indifferent
2|84|And ˹remember˺ when We took your covenant that you would neither shed each other’s blood nor expel each other from their homes, you gave your pledge and bore witness
2|85|But here you are, killing each other and expelling some of your people from their homes, aiding one another in sin and aggression; and when those ˹expelled˺ come to you as captives, you still ransom them—though expelling them was unlawful for you. Do you believe in some of the Scripture and reject the rest? Is there any reward for those who do so among you other than disgrace in this worldly life and being subjected to the harshest punishment on the Day of Judgment? For God is never unaware of what you do
2|86|These are the ones who trade the Hereafter for the life of this world. So their punishment will not be reduced, nor will they be helped
2|87|Indeed, We gave Moses the Book and sent after him successive messengers. And We gave Jesus, son of Mary, clear proofs and supported him with the holy spirit. Why is it that every time a messenger comes to you ˹Israelites˺ with something you do not like, you become arrogant, rejecting some and killing others
2|88|They say, “Our hearts are unreceptive!” In fact, God has condemned them for their disbelief. They have but little faith
2|89|Although they used to pray for victory ˹by means of the Prophet˺ over the polytheists, when there came to them a Book from God which they recognized, confirming the Scripture they had ˹in their hands˺, they rejected it. So may God’s condemnation be upon the disbelievers
2|90|Miserable is the price they have sold their souls for—denying God’s revelation and resenting God for granting His grace to whoever He wills of His servants! They have earned wrath upon wrath. And such disbelievers will suffer a humiliating punishment
2|91|When it is said to them: “Believe in what God has revealed,” they reply, “We only believe in what was sent down to us,” and they deny what came afterwards, though it is the truth confirming their own Scriptures! Ask ˹them, O Prophet˺, “Why then did you kill God’s prophets before, if you are ˹truly˺ believers?”
2|92|Indeed, Moses came to you with clear proofs, then you worshipped the calf in his absence, acting wrongfully
2|93|And when We took your covenant and raised the mountain above you ˹saying˺, “Hold firmly to that ˹Scripture˺ which We have given you and obey,” they answered, “We hear and disobey.” The love of the calf was rooted in their hearts because of their disbelief. Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “How evil is what your ˹so-called˺ belief prompts you to do, if you ˹actually˺ believe ˹in the Torah˺!”
2|94|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “If the ˹eternal˺ Home of the Hereafter with God is exclusively for you ˹Israelites˺ out of all humanity, then wish for death if what you say is true!”
2|95|But they will never wish for that because of what their hands have done. And God has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of the wrongdoers
2|96|You will surely find them clinging to life more eagerly than any other people, even more than polytheists. Each one of them wishes to live a thousand years. But even if they were to live that long, it would not save them from the punishment. And God is All-Seeing of what they do
2|97|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Whoever is an enemy of Gabriel should know that he revealed this ˹Quran˺ to your heart by God’s Will, confirming what came before it—a guide and good news for the believers.”
2|98|Whoever is an enemy of God, His angels, His messengers, Gabriel, and Michael, then ˹let them know that˺ God is certainly the enemy of the disbelievers
2|99|Indeed, We have sent down to you ˹O Prophet˺ clear revelations. ˹But˺ none will deny them except the rebellious
2|100|Why is it that every time they make a covenant, a group of them casts it aside? In fact, most of them do not believe
2|101|Now, when a messenger from God has come to them—confirming their own Scriptures—some of the People of the Book cast the Book of God behind their backs as if they did not know
2|102|They ˹instead˺ followed the magic promoted by the devils during the reign of Solomon. Never did Solomon disbelieve, rather the devils disbelieved. They taught magic to the people, along with what had been revealed to the two angels, Hârût and Mârût, in Babylon. The two angels never taught anyone without saying, “We are only a test ˹for you˺, so do not abandon ˹your˺ faith.” Yet people learned ˹magic˺ that caused a rift ˹even˺ between husband and wife; although their magic could not harm anyone except by God’s Will. They learned what harmed them and did not benefit them—although they already knew that whoever buys into magic would have no share in the Hereafter. Miserable indeed was the price for which they sold their souls, if only they knew
2|103|If only they were faithful and mindful ˹of God˺, there would have been a better reward from God, if only they knew
2|104|O believers! Do not say, “Râ’ina.” [Herd us!] But say, “Unẓurna,” [Tend to us!] and listen ˹attentively˺. And the disbelievers will suffer a painful punishment
2|105|The disbelievers from the People of the Book and the polytheists would not want you to receive any blessing from your Lord, but God selects whoever He wills for His mercy. And God is the Lord of infinite bounty
2|106|If We ever abrogate a verse or cause it to be forgotten, We replace it with a better or similar one. Do you not know that God is Most Capable of everything
2|107|Do you not know that the kingdom of the heavens and the earth belongs ˹only˺ to God, and you have no guardian or helper besides God
2|108|Or do you ˹believers˺ intend to ask of your Messenger as Moses was asked before? But whoever trades belief for disbelief has truly strayed from the Right Way
2|109|Many among the People of the Book wish they could turn you ˹believers˺ back to disbelief because of their envy, after the truth has been made clear to them. Pardon and bear with them until God delivers His decision. Surely God is Most Capable of everything
2|110|Establish prayer, and pay alms-tax. Whatever good you send forth for yourselves, you will ˹certainly˺ find ˹its reward˺ with God. Surely God is All-Seeing of what you do
2|111|The Jews and Christians each claim that none will enter Paradise except those of their own faith. These are their desires. Reply, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Show ˹me˺ your proof if what you say is true.”
2|112|But no! Whoever submits themselves to God and does good will have their reward with their Lord. And there will be no fear for them, nor will they grieve
2|113|The Jews say, “The Christians have nothing to stand on” and the Christians say, “The Jews have nothing to stand on,” although both recite the Scriptures. And those ˹pagans˺ who have no knowledge say the same ˹about people of faith˺. Surely God will judge between them on the Day of Judgment regarding their dispute
2|114|Who does more wrong than those who prevent God’s Name from being mentioned in His places of worship and strive to destroy them? Such people have no right to enter these places except with fear. For them is disgrace in this world, and they will suffer a tremendous punishment in the Hereafter
2|115|To God belong the east and the west, so wherever you turn you are facing ˹towards˺ God. Surely God is All-Encompassing, All-Knowing
2|116|They say, “God has offspring.” Glory be to Him! In fact, to Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth—all are subject to His Will
2|117|˹He is˺ the Originator of the heavens and the earth! When He decrees a matter, He simply tells it, “Be!” And it is
2|118|Those who have no knowledge say, “If only God would speak to us or a sign would come to us!” The same was said by those who came before. Their hearts are all alike. Indeed, We have made the signs clear for people of sure faith
2|119|We have surely sent you with the truth ˹O Prophet˺ as a deliverer of good news and a warner. And you will not be accountable for the residents of the Hellfire
2|120|Never will the Jews or Christians be pleased with you, until you follow their faith. Say, “God’s guidance is the only ˹true˺ guidance.” And if you were to follow their desires after ˹all˺ the knowledge that has come to you, there would be none to protect or help you against God
2|121|Those We have given the Book follow it as it should be followed. It is they who ˹truly˺ believe in it. As for those who reject it, it is they who are the losers
2|122|O Children of Israel! Remember My favours upon you and how I honoured you above the others
2|123|And guard yourselves against the Day when no soul will be of any help to another. No ransom will be taken, no intercession accepted, and no help will be given
2|124|˹Remember˺ when Abraham was tested by his Lord with ˹certain˺ commandments, which he fulfilled. God said, “I will certainly make you into a role model for the people.” Abraham asked, “What about my offspring?” God replied, “My covenant is not extended to the wrongdoers.”
2|125|And ˹remember˺ when We made the Sacred House a centre and a sanctuary for the people ˹saying˺, “˹You may˺ take the standing-place of Abraham as a site of prayer.” And We entrusted Abraham and Ishmael to purify My House for those who circle it, who meditate in it, and who bow and prostrate themselves ˹in prayer˺
2|126|And ˹remember˺ when Abraham said, “My Lord, make this city ˹of Mecca˺ secure and provide fruits to its people—those among them who believe in God and the Last Day.” He answered, “As for those who disbelieve, I will let them enjoy themselves for a little while, then I will condemn them to the torment of the Fire. What an evil destination!”
2|127|And ˹remember˺ when Abraham raised the foundation of the House with Ishmael, ˹both praying,˺ “Our Lord! Accept ˹this˺ from us. You are indeed the All-Hearing, All-Knowing
2|128|Our Lord! Make us both ˹fully˺ submit to You and from our descendants a nation that will submit to you. Show us our rituals, and turn to us in grace. You are truly the Accepter of Repentance, Most Merciful
2|129|Our Lord! Raise from among them a messenger who will recite to them Your revelations, teach them the Book and wisdom, and purify them. Indeed, You ˹alone˺ are the Almighty, All-Wise.”
2|130|And who would reject the faith of Abraham except a fool! We certainly chose him in this life, and in the Hereafter he will surely be among the righteous
2|131|When his Lord ordered him, “Submit ˹to My Will˺,” he responded, “I submit to the Lord of all worlds.”
2|132|This was the advice of Abraham—as well as Jacob—to his children, ˹saying˺, “Indeed, God has chosen for you this faith; so do not die except in ˹a state of full˺ submission.”
2|133|Or did you witness when death came to Jacob? He asked his children, “Who will you worship after my passing?” They replied, “We will ˹continue to˺ worship your God, the God of your forefathers—Abraham, Ishmael, and Isaac—the One God. And to Him we ˹all˺ submit.”
2|134|That was a community that had already gone before. For them is what they earned and for you is what you have earned. And you will not be accountable for what they have done
2|135|The Jews and Christians each say, “Follow our faith to be ˹rightly˺ guided.” Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “No! We follow the faith of Abraham, the upright—who was not a polytheist.”
2|136|Say, ˹O believers,˺ “We believe in God and what has been revealed to us; and what was revealed to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and his descendants; and what was given to Moses, Jesus, and other prophets from their Lord. We make no distinction between any of them. And to God we all submit.”
2|137|So if they believe in what you believe, then they will indeed be ˹rightly˺ guided. But if they turn away, they are simply opposed ˹to the truth˺. But God will spare you their evil. For He is the All-Hearing, All-Knowing
2|138|This is the ˹natural˺ Way of God. And who is better than God in ordaining a way? And we worship ˹none but˺ Him
2|139|Say, “Would you dispute with us about God, while He is our Lord and your Lord? We are accountable for our deeds and you for yours. And we are devoted to Him ˹alone˺
2|140|Do you claim that Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and his descendants were all Jews or Christians?” Say, “Who is more knowledgeable: you or God?” Who does more wrong than those who hide the testimony they received from God? And God is never unaware of what you do
2|141|That was a community that had already gone before. For them is what they earned and for you is what you have earned. And you will not be accountable for what they have done
2|142|The foolish among the people will ask, “Why did they turn away from the direction of prayer they used to face?” Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “The east and west belong ˹only˺ to God. He guides whoever He wills to the Straight Path.”
2|143|And so We have made you ˹believers˺ an upright community so that you may be witnesses over humanity and that the Messenger may be a witness over you. We assigned your former direction of prayer only to distinguish those who would remain faithful to the Messenger from those who would lose faith. It was certainly a difficult test except for those ˹rightly˺ guided by God. And God would never discount your ˹previous acts of˺ faith. Surely God is Ever Gracious and Most Merciful to humanity
2|144|Indeed, We see you ˹O Prophet˺ turning your face towards heaven. Now We will make you turn towards a direction ˹of prayer˺ that will please you. So turn your face towards the Sacred Mosque ˹in Mecca˺—wherever you are, turn your faces towards it. Those who were given the Scripture certainly know this to be the truth from their Lord. And God is never unaware of what they do
2|145|Even if you were to bring every proof to the People of the Book, they would not accept your direction ˹of prayer˺, nor would you accept theirs; nor would any of them accept the direction ˹of prayer˺ of another. And if you were to follow their desires after ˹all˺ the knowledge that has come to you, then you would certainly be one of the wrongdoers
2|146|Those We have given the Scripture recognize this ˹Prophet˺ as they recognize their own children. Yet a group of them hides the truth knowingly
2|147|˹This is˺ the truth from your Lord, so do not ever be one of those who doubt
2|148|Everyone turns to their own direction ˹of prayer˺. So compete with one another in doing good. Wherever you are, God will bring you all together ˹for judgment˺. Surely God is Most Capable of everything
2|149|Wherever you are ˹O Prophet˺, turn your face towards the Sacred Mosque. This is certainly the truth from your Lord. And God is never unaware of what you ˹all˺ do
2|150|Wherever you are ˹O Prophet˺, turn your face towards the Sacred Mosque. And wherever you ˹believers˺ are, face towards it, so that people will have no argument against you, except the wrongdoers among them. Do not fear them; fear Me, so that I may ˹continue to˺ perfect My favour upon you and so you may be ˹rightly˺ guided
2|151|Since We have sent you a messenger from among yourselves—reciting to you Our revelations, purifying you, teaching you the Book and wisdom, and teaching you what you never knew—
2|152|remember Me; I will remember you. And thank Me, and never be ungrateful
2|153|O believers! Seek comfort in patience and prayer. God is truly with those who are patient
2|154|Never say that those martyred in the cause of God are dead—in fact, they are alive! But you do not perceive it
2|155|We will certainly test you with a touch of fear and famine and loss of property, life, and crops. Give good news to those who patiently endure—
2|156|who, when faced with a disaster, say, “Surely to God we belong and to Him we will ˹all˺ return.”
2|157|They are the ones who will receive God’s blessings and mercy. And it is they who are ˹rightly˺ guided
2|158|Indeed, ˹the hills of˺ Ṣafa and Marwah are among the symbols of God. So whoever performs the pilgrimage or minor pilgrimage, let them walk between ˹the two hills˺. And whoever does good willingly, God is truly Appreciative, All-Knowing
2|159|Those who hide the clear proofs and guidance that We have revealed—after We made it clear for humanity in the Book—will be condemned by God and ˹all˺ those who condemn
2|160|As for those who repent, mend their ways, and let the truth be known, they are the ones to whom I will turn ˹in forgiveness˺, for I am the Accepter of Repentance, Most Merciful
2|161|Surely those who disbelieve and die as disbelievers are condemned by God, the angels, and all of humanity
2|162|They will be in Hell forever. Their punishment will not be lightened, nor will they be delayed ˹from it˺
2|163|Your God is ˹only˺ One God. There is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful
2|164|Indeed, in the creation of the heavens and the earth; the alternation of the day and the night; the ships that sail the sea for the benefit of humanity; the rain sent down by God from the skies, reviving the earth after its death; the scattering of all kinds of creatures throughout; the shifting of the winds; and the clouds drifting between the heavens and the earth—˹in all of this˺ are surely signs for people of understanding
2|165|Still there are some who take others as God’s equal—they love them as they should love God—but the ˹true˺ believers love God even more. If only the wrongdoers could see the ˹horrible˺ punishment ˹awaiting them˺, they would certainly realize that all power belongs to God and that God is indeed severe in punishment
2|166|˹Consider the Day˺ when those who misled others will disown their followers—when they face the torment—and the bonds that united them will be cut off
2|167|The ˹misled˺ followers will cry, “If only we could have a second chance, we would disown them as they disowned us.” And so God will make them remorseful of their misdeeds. And they will never ˹be able to˺ leave the Fire
2|168|O humanity! Eat from what is lawful and good on the earth and do not follow Satan’s footsteps. He is truly your sworn enemy
2|169|He only incites you to commit evil and indecency, and to claim against God what you do not know
2|170|When it is said to them, “Follow what God has revealed,” they reply, “No! We ˹only˺ follow what we found our forefathers practicing.” ˹Would they still do so,˺ even if their forefathers had ˹absolutely˺ no understanding or guidance
2|171|The example of the disbelievers ˹not responding to the Messenger’s warning˺ is like a flock not comprehending the calls and cries of the shepherd. ˹They are wilfully˺ deaf, dumb and blind so they have no understanding
2|172|O believers! Eat from the good things We have provided for you. And give thanks to God if you ˹truly˺ worship Him ˹alone˺
2|173|He has only forbidden you ˹to eat˺ carrion, blood, swine, and what is slaughtered in the name of any other than God. But if someone is compelled by necessity—neither driven by desire nor exceeding immediate need—they will not be sinful. Surely God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
2|174|Indeed, those who hide God’s revelations, trading them for a fleeting gain consume nothing but fire into their bellies. God will neither speak to them on the Day of Judgment, nor will He purify them. And they will suffer a painful punishment
2|175|They are the ones who trade guidance for misguidance and forgiveness for punishment. How persistent are they in pursuit of the Fire
2|176|That is because God has revealed the Book in truth. And surely those who differ regarding it are totally engrossed in opposition
2|177|Righteousness is not in turning your faces towards the east or the west. Rather, the righteous are those who believe in God, the Last Day, the angels, the Books, and the prophets; who give charity out of their cherished wealth to relatives, orphans, the poor, ˹needy˺ travellers, beggars, and for freeing captives; who establish prayer, pay alms-tax, and keep the pledges they make; and who are patient in times of suffering, adversity, and in ˹the heat of˺ battle. It is they who are true ˹in faith˺, and it is they who are mindful ˹of God˺
2|178|O believers! ˹The law of˺ retaliation is set for you in cases of murder—a free man for a free man, a slave for a slave, and a female for a female. But if the offender is pardoned by the victim’s guardian, then blood-money should be decided fairly and payment should be made courteously. This is a concession and a mercy from your Lord. But whoever transgresses after that will suffer a painful punishment
2|179|There is ˹security of˺ life for you in ˹the law of˺ retaliation, O people of reason, so that you may become mindful ˹of God˺
2|180|It is prescribed that when death approaches any of you—if they leave something of value—a will should be made in favour of parents and immediate family with fairness. ˹This is˺ an obligation on those who are mindful ˹of God˺
2|181|But whoever changes the will after hearing it, the blame will only be on those who made the change. Indeed, God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing
2|182|Whoever suspects an error or an injustice in the will and brings about a ˹fair˺ settlement among the parties will not be sinful. Surely God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
2|183|O believers! Fasting is prescribed for you—as it was for those before you—so perhaps you will become mindful ˹of God˺
2|184|˹Fast a˺ prescribed number of days. But whoever of you is ill or on a journey, then ˹let them fast˺ an equal number of days ˹after Ramaḍân˺. For those who can only fast with extreme difficulty, compensation can be made by feeding a needy person ˹for every day not fasted˺. But whoever volunteers to give more, it is better for them. And to fast is better for you, if only you knew
2|185|Ramaḍân is the month in which the Quran was revealed as a guide for humanity with clear proofs of guidance and the standard ˹to distinguish between right and wrong˺. So whoever is present this month, let them fast. But whoever is ill or on a journey, then ˹let them fast˺ an equal number of days ˹after Ramaḍân˺. God intends ease for you, not hardship, so that you may complete the prescribed period and proclaim the greatness of God for guiding you, and perhaps you will be grateful
2|186|When My servants ask you ˹O Prophet˺ about Me: I am truly near. I respond to one’s prayer when they call upon Me. So let them respond ˹with obedience˺ to Me and believe in Me, perhaps they will be guided ˹to the Right Way˺
2|187|It has been made permissible for you to be intimate with your wives during the nights preceding the fast. Your spouses are a garment for you as you are for them. God knows that you were deceiving yourselves. So He has accepted your repentance and pardoned you. So now you may be intimate with them and seek what God has prescribed for you. ˹You may˺ eat and drink until you see the light of dawn breaking the darkness of night, then complete the fast until nightfall. Do not be intimate with your spouses while you are meditating in the mosques. These are the limits set by God, so do not exceed them. This is how God makes His revelations clear to people, so they may become mindful ˹of Him˺
2|188|Do not consume one another’s wealth unjustly, nor deliberately bribe authorities in order to devour a portion of others’ property, knowing that it is a sin
2|189|They ask you ˹O Prophet˺ about the phases of the moon. Say, “They are a means for people to determine time and pilgrimage.” Righteousness is not in entering your houses from the back doors. Rather, righteousness is to be mindful ˹of God˺. So enter your homes through their ˹proper˺ doors, and be mindful of God so you may be successful
2|190|Fight in the cause of God ˹only˺ against those who wage war against you, but do not exceed the limits. God does not like transgressors
2|191|Kill them wherever you come upon them and drive them out of the places from which they have driven you out. For persecution is far worse than killing. And do not fight them at the Sacred Mosque unless they attack you there. If they do so, then fight them—that is the reward of the disbelievers
2|192|But if they cease, then surely God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
2|193|Fight against them ˹if they persecute you˺ until there is no more persecution, and ˹your˺ devotion will be to God ˹alone˺. If they stop ˹persecuting you˺, let there be no hostility except against the aggressors
2|194|˹There will be retaliation in˺ a sacred month for ˹an offence in˺ a sacred month, and all violations will bring about retaliation. So, if anyone attacks you, retaliate in the same manner. ˹But˺ be mindful of God, and know that God is with those mindful ˹of Him˺
2|195|Spend in the cause of God and do not let your own hands throw you into destruction ˹by withholding˺. And do good, for God certainly loves the good-doers
2|196|Complete the pilgrimage and minor pilgrimage for God. But if prevented ˹from proceeding˺, then ˹offer˺ whatever sacrificial animals you can afford. And do not shave your heads until the sacrificial animal reaches its destination. But if any of you is ill or has a scalp ailment ˹requiring shaving˺, then compensate either by fasting, charity, or a sacrificial offering. In times of peace, you may combine the pilgrimage and minor pilgrimage then make the sacrificial offering you can afford. Whoever cannot afford that ˹offering˺, let them fast three days during pilgrimage and seven after returning ˹home˺—completing ten. These offerings are for those who do not live near the Sacred House. And be mindful of God, and know that God is severe in punishment
2|197|˹Commitment to˺ pilgrimage is made in appointed months. Whoever commits to ˹performing˺ pilgrimage, let them stay away from intimate relations, foul language, and arguments during pilgrimage. Whatever good you do, God ˹fully˺ knows of it. Take ˹necessary˺ provisions ˹for the journey˺—surely the best provision is righteousness. And be mindful of Me, O people of reason
2|198|There is no blame on you for seeking the bounty of your Lord ˹during this journey˺. When you return from ’Arafât, praise God near the sacred place and praise Him for having guided you, for surely before this ˹guidance˺ you were astray
2|199|Then go forth with the rest of the pilgrims. And seek God’s forgiveness. Surely God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
2|200|When you have fulfilled your sacred rites, praise God as you used to praise your forefathers ˹before Islam˺, or even more passionately. There are some who say, “Our Lord! Grant us ˹Your bounties˺ in this world,” but they will have no share in the Hereafter
2|201|Yet there are others who say, “Our Lord! Grant us the good of this world and the Hereafter, and protect us from the torment of the Fire.”
2|202|It is they who will receive a ˹heavenly˺ reward for the good they have done. Surely God is swift in reckoning
2|203|And remember God during ˹these˺ appointed days. Whoever departs swiftly on the second day is not sinful, neither are those who stay behind ˹till the third—seeking additional reward˺, so long as they are mindful ˹of their Lord˺. And be mindful of God, and know that to Him you will ˹all˺ be gathered
2|204|There are some ˹hypocrites˺ who impress you with their views regarding worldly affairs and openly call upon God to witness what is in their hearts, yet they are your worst adversaries
2|205|And when they leave ˹you˺, they strive throughout the land to spread mischief in it and destroy crops and cattle. God does not like mischief
2|206|When it is said to them, “Fear God,” pride carries them off to sin. Hell will be their proper place. What an evil place to rest
2|207|And there are those who would dedicate their lives to God’s pleasure. And God is Ever Gracious to ˹His˺ servants
2|208|O believers! Enter into Islam wholeheartedly and do not follow Satan’s footsteps. Surely he is your sworn enemy
2|209|If you falter after receiving the clear proofs, then know that God is indeed Almighty, All-Wise
2|210|Are they waiting for God ˹Himself˺ to come to them in the shade of clouds, along with the angels? ˹If He did˺, then the matter would be settled ˹at once˺. And to God ˹all˺ matters will be returned ˹for judgment˺
2|211|Ask the Children of Israel how many clear signs We have given them. And whoever trades God’s favour—after receiving it—˹for disbelief˺ should know that God is indeed severe in punishment
2|212|The life of this world has been made appealing to the disbelievers, and they mock the believers. Those who are mindful ˹of God˺ will rank above them on the Day of Judgment. And God provides for whoever He wills without limit
2|213|Humanity had once been one community ˹of believers before they lost faith˺. Then God raised prophets as deliverers of good news and as warners, and revealed to them the Scriptures in truth to judge among people regarding their disputes. And no one disputed the Scriptures except the very people who received them after clear proofs had come to them—out of jealousy. Then God, by His grace, has guided the believers to the truth regarding those disputes. And God guides whoever He wills to the Straight Path
2|214|Do you think you will be admitted into Paradise without being tested like those before you? They were afflicted with suffering and adversity and were so ˹violently˺ shaken that ˹even˺ the Messenger and the believers with him cried out, “When will God’s help come?” Indeed, God’s help is ˹always˺ near
2|215|They ask you ˹O Prophet in˺ what ˹way˺ they should donate. Say, “Whatever donations you give are for parents, relatives, orphans, the poor, and ˹needy˺ travellers. Whatever good you do is certainly well known to God.”
2|216|Fighting has been made obligatory upon you ˹believers˺, though you dislike it. Perhaps you dislike something which is good for you and like something which is bad for you. God knows and you do not know
2|217|They ask you ˹O Prophet˺ about fighting in the sacred months. Say, “Fighting during these months is a great sin. But hindering ˹others˺ from the Path of God, rejecting Him, and expelling the worshippers from the Sacred Mosque is ˹a˺ greater ˹sin˺ in the sight of God. For persecution is far worse than killing. And they will not stop fighting you until they turn you away from your faith—if they can. And whoever among you renounces their own faith and dies a disbeliever, their deeds will become void in this life and in the Hereafter. It is they who will be the residents of the Fire. They will be there forever.”
2|218|Surely those who have believed, emigrated, and struggled in the Way of God—they can hope for God’s mercy. And God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
2|219|They ask you ˹O Prophet˺ about intoxicants and gambling. Say, “There is great evil in both, as well as some benefit for people—but the evil outweighs the benefit.” They ˹also˺ ask you ˹O Prophet˺ what they should donate. Say, “Whatever you can spare.” This is how God makes His revelations clear to you ˹believers˺, so perhaps you may reflect
2|220|upon this world and the Hereafter. And they ask you ˹O Prophet˺ concerning orphans. Say, “Improving their condition is best. And if you partner with them, they are bonded with you ˹in faith˺. And God knows who intends harm and who intends good. Had God willed, He could have made it difficult for you. Surely God is Almighty, All-Wise.”
2|221|Do not marry polytheistic women until they believe; for a believing slave-woman is better than a free polytheist, even though she may look pleasant to you. And do not marry your women to polytheistic men until they believe, for a believing slave-man is better than a free polytheist, even though he may look pleasant to you. They invite ˹you˺ to the Fire while God invites ˹you˺ to Paradise and forgiveness by His grace. He makes His revelations clear to the people so perhaps they will be mindful
2|222|They ask you ˹O Prophet˺ about menstruation. Say, “Beware of its harm! So keep away, and do not have intercourse with your wives during their monthly cycles until they are purified. When they purify themselves, then you may approach them in the manner specified by God. Surely God loves those who always turn to Him in repentance and those who purify themselves.”
2|223|Your wives are like farmland for you, so approach them ˹consensually˺ as you please. And send forth something good for yourselves. Be mindful of God, and know that you will meet Him. And give good news to the believers
2|224|Do not use God’s Name in your oaths as an excuse for not doing good, not guarding against evil, or not making peace between people. And God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing
2|225|God will not hold you accountable for unintentional oaths, but for what you intended in your hearts. And God is All-Forgiving, Most Forbearing
2|226|Those who swear not to have intercourse with their wives must wait for four months. If they change their mind, then God is certainly All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
2|227|But if they settle on divorce, then God is indeed All-Hearing, All-Knowing
2|228|Divorced women must wait three monthly cycles ˹before they can re-marry˺. It is not lawful for them to conceal what God has created in their wombs, if they ˹truly˺ believe in God and the Last Day. And their husbands reserve the right to take them back within that period if they desire reconciliation. Women have rights similar to those of men equitably, although men have a degree ˹of responsibility˺ above them. And God is Almighty, All-Wise
2|229|Divorce may be retracted twice, then the husband must retain ˹his wife˺ with honour or separate ˹from her˺ with grace. It is not lawful for husbands to take back anything of the dowry given to their wives, unless the couple fears not being able to keep within the limits of God. So if you fear they will not be able to keep within the limits of God, there is no blame if the wife compensates the husband to obtain divorce. These are the limits set by God, so do not transgress them. And whoever transgresses the limits of God, they are the ˹true˺ wrongdoers
2|230|So if a husband divorces his wife ˹three times˺, then it is not lawful for him to remarry her until after she has married another man and then is divorced. Then it is permissible for them to reunite, as long as they feel they are able to maintain the limits of God. These are the limits set by God, which He makes clear for people of knowledge
2|231|When you divorce women and they have ˹almost˺ reached the end of their waiting period, either retain them honourably or let them go honourably. But do not retain them ˹only˺ to harm them ˹or˺ to take advantage ˹of them˺. Whoever does that surely wrongs his own soul. Do not take God’s revelations lightly. Remember God’s favours upon you as well as the Book and wisdom He has sent down for your guidance. Be mindful of God, and know that God has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all things
2|232|When you have divorced women and they have reached the end of their waiting period, do not prevent them from re-marrying their ex-husbands if they come to an honourable agreement. This is enjoined on whoever has faith in God and the Last Day. This is purer and more dignifying for you. God knows and you do not know
2|233|˹Divorced˺ mothers will breastfeed their offspring for two whole years, for those who wish to complete the nursing ˹of their child˺. The child’s father will provide reasonable maintenance and clothing for the mother ˹during that period˺. No one will be charged with more than they can bear. No mother or father should be made to suffer for their child. The ˹father’s˺ heirs are under the same obligation. But if both sides decide—after mutual consultation and consent—to wean a child, then there is no blame on them. If you decide to have your children nursed by a wet-nurse, it is permissible as long as you pay fairly. Be mindful of God, and know that God is All-Seeing of what you do
2|234|As for those of you who die and leave widows behind, let them observe a waiting period of four months and ten days. When they have reached the end of this period, then you are not accountable for what they decide for themselves in a reasonable manner. And God is All-Aware of what you do
2|235|There is no blame on you for subtly showing interest in ˹divorced or widowed˺ women or for hiding ˹the intention˺ in your hearts. God knows that you are considering them ˹for marriage˺. But do not make a secret commitment with them—you can only show interest in them appropriately. Do not commit to the bond of marriage until the waiting period expires. Know that God is aware of what is in your hearts, so beware of Him. And know that God is All-Forgiving, Most Forbearing
2|236|There is no blame if you divorce women before the marriage is consummated or the dowry is settled. But give them a ˹suitable˺ compensation—the rich according to his means and the poor according to his. A reasonable compensation is an obligation on the good-doers
2|237|And if you divorce them before consummating the marriage but after deciding on a dowry, pay half of the dowry, unless the wife graciously waives it or the husband graciously pays in full. Graciousness is closer to righteousness. And do not forget kindness among yourselves. Surely God is All-Seeing of what you do
2|238|Observe the ˹five obligatory˺ prayers—especially the middle prayer—and stand in true devotion to God
2|239|If you are in danger, pray on foot or while riding. But when you are safe, ˹take time to˺ remember God for teaching you what you did not know
2|240|Those of you who die leaving widows should bequeath for them a year’s maintenance without forcing them out. But if they choose to leave, you are not accountable for what they reasonably decide for themselves. And God is Almighty, All-Wise
2|241|Reasonable provisions must be made for divorced women—a duty on those mindful ˹of God˺
2|242|This is how God makes His revelations clear to you, so perhaps you will understand
2|243|Have you ˹O Prophet˺ not seen those who fled their homes in the thousands for fear of death? God said to them, “Die!” then He gave them life. Surely God is ever Bountiful to humanity, but most people are ungrateful
2|244|Fight in the cause of God, and know that God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing
2|245|Who will lend to God a good loan which God will multiply many times over? It is God ˹alone˺ who decreases and increases ˹wealth˺. And to Him you will ˹all˺ be returned
2|246|Have you not seen those chiefs of the Children of Israel after Moses? They said to one of their prophets, “Appoint for us a king, ˹and˺ we will fight in the cause of God.” He said, “Are you not going to cower if ordered to fight?” They replied, “How could we refuse to fight in the cause of God, while we were driven out of our homes and ˹separated from˺ our children?” But when they were ordered to fight, they fled, except for a few of them. And God has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of the wrongdoers
2|247|Their prophet told them, “God has appointed Saul to be your king.” They protested, “How can he be our king when some of us are more deserving of kingship than he, and he has not been blessed with vast riches?” He replied, “God has chosen him over you and blessed him with knowledge and stature. God grants kingship to whoever He wills. And God is All-Bountiful, All-Knowing.”
2|248|Their prophet further told them, “The sign of Saul’s kingship is that the Ark will come to you—containing reassurance from your Lord and relics of the family of Moses and the family of Aaron, which will be carried by the angels. Surely in this is a sign for you, if you ˹truly˺ believe.”
2|249|When Saul marched forth with his army, he cautioned: “God will test you with a river. So whoever drinks ˹his fill˺ from it is not with me, and whoever does not taste it—except a sip from the hollow of his hands—is definitely with me.” They all drank ˹their fill˺ except for a few! When he and the ˹remaining˺ faithful with him crossed the river, they said, “Now we are no match for Goliath and his warriors.” But those ˹believers˺ who were certain they would meet God reasoned, “How many times has a small force vanquished a mighty army by the Will of God! And God is ˹always˺ with the steadfast.”
2|250|When they advanced to face Goliath and his warriors, they prayed, “Our Lord! Shower us with perseverance, make our steps firm, and give us victory over the disbelieving people.”
2|251|So they defeated them by God’s Will, and David killed Goliath. And God blessed David with kingship and wisdom and taught him what He willed. Had God not repelled a group of people by ˹the might of˺ another, corruption would have dominated the earth, but God is Gracious to all
2|252|These are God’s revelations which We recite to you ˹O Prophet˺ in truth. And you are truly one of the messengers
2|253|We have chosen some of those messengers above others. God spoke directly to some, and raised some high in rank. To Jesus, son of Mary, We gave clear proofs and supported him with the holy spirit. If God had willed, succeeding generations would not have fought ˹among themselves˺ after receiving the clear proofs. But they differed—some believed while others disbelieved. Yet if God had willed, they would not have fought one another. But God does what He wills
2|254|O believers! Donate from what We have provided for you before the arrival of a Day when there will be no bargaining, friendship, or intercession. Those who disbelieve are ˹truly˺ the wrongdoers
2|255|God! There is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him, the Ever-Living, All-Sustaining. Neither drowsiness nor sleep overtakes Him. To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. Who could possibly intercede with Him without His permission? He ˹fully˺ knows what is ahead of them and what is behind them, but no one can grasp any of His knowledge—except what He wills ˹to reveal˺. His Seat encompasses the heavens and the earth, and the preservation of both does not tire Him. For He is the Most High, the Greatest
2|256|Let there be no compulsion in religion, for the truth stands out clearly from falsehood. So whoever renounces false gods and believes in God has certainly grasped the firmest, unfailing hand-hold. And God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing
2|257|God is the Guardian of the believers—He brings them out of darkness and into light. As for the disbelievers, their guardians are false gods who lead them out of light and into darkness. It is they who will be the residents of the Fire. They will be there forever
2|258|Are you ˹O Prophet˺ not aware of the one who argued with Abraham about his Lord because God had granted him kingship? ˹Remember˺ when Abraham said, “My Lord is the One Who has power to give life and cause death.” He argued, “I too have the power to give life and cause death.” Abraham challenged ˹him˺, “God causes the sun to rise from the east. So make it rise from the west.” And so the disbeliever was dumbstruck. And God does not guide the wrongdoing people
2|259|Or ˹are you not aware of˺ the one who passed by a city which was in ruins. He wondered, “How could God bring this back to life after its destruction?” So God caused him to die for a hundred years then brought him back to life. God asked, “How long have you remained ˹in this state˺?” He replied, “Perhaps a day or part of a day.” God said, “No! You have remained here for a hundred years! Just look at your food and drink—they have not spoiled. ˹But now˺ look at ˹the remains of˺ your donkey! And ˹so˺ We have made you into a sign for humanity. And look at the bones ˹of the donkey˺, how We bring them together then clothe them with flesh!” When this was made clear to him, he declared, “˹Now˺ I know that God is Most Capable of everything.”
2|260|And ˹remember˺ when Abraham said, “My Lord! Show me how you give life to the dead.” God responded, “Do you not believe?” Abraham replied, “Yes I do, but just so my heart can be reassured.” God said, “Then bring four birds, train them to come to you, ˹then cut them into pieces,˺ and scatter them on different hilltops. Then call them back, they will fly to you in haste. And ˹so you will˺ know that God is Almighty, All-Wise.”
2|261|The example of those who spend their wealth in the cause of God is that of a grain that sprouts into seven ears, each bearing one hundred grains. And God multiplies ˹the reward even more˺ to whoever He wills. For God is All-Bountiful, All-Knowing
2|262|Those who spend their wealth in the cause of God and do not follow their charity with reminders of their generosity or hurtful words—they will get their reward from their Lord, and there will be no fear for them, nor will they grieve
2|263|Kind words and forgiveness are better than charity followed by injury. And God is Self-Sufficient, Most Forbearing
2|264|O believers! Do not waste your charity with reminders ˹of your generosity˺ or hurtful words, like those who donate their wealth just to show off and do not believe in God or the Last Day. Their example is that of a hard barren rock covered with a thin layer of soil hit by a strong rain—leaving it just a bare stone. Such people are unable to preserve the reward of their charity. God does not guide ˹such˺ disbelieving people
2|265|And the example of those who donate their wealth, seeking God’s pleasure and believing the reward is certain, is that of a garden on a fertile hill: when heavy rain falls, it yields up twice its normal produce. If no heavy rain falls, a drizzle is sufficient. And God is All-Seeing of what you do
2|266|Would any of you wish to have a garden with palm trees, grapevines, and all kinds of fruits with rivers flowing underneath and as they grow very old with dependent children, a fiery whirlwind hits the garden, burning it all up? This is how God makes His revelations clear to you, so perhaps you will reflect
2|267|O believers! Donate from the best of what you have earned and of what We have produced for you from the earth. Do not pick out worthless things for donation, which you yourselves would only accept with closed eyes. And know that God is Self-Sufficient, Praiseworthy
2|268|The Devil threatens you with ˹the prospect of˺ poverty and bids you to the shameful deed ˹of stinginess˺, while God promises you forgiveness and ˹great˺ bounties from Him. And God is All-Bountiful, All-Knowing
2|269|God grants wisdom to whoever He wills. And whoever is granted wisdom is certainly blessed with a great privilege. But none will be mindful ˹of this˺ except people of reason
2|270|Whatever charities you give or vows you make are surely known to God. And the wrongdoers will have no helpers
2|271|To give charity publicly is good, but to give to the poor privately is better for you, and will absolve you of your sins. And God is All-Aware of what you do
2|272|You are not responsible for people’s guidance ˹O Prophet˺—it is God Who guides whoever He wills. Whatever you ˹believers˺ spend in charity, it is for your own good—as long as you do so seeking the pleasure of God. Whatever you donate will be paid back to you in full, and you will not be wronged
2|273|˹Charity is˺ for the needy who are too engaged in the cause of God to move about in the land ˹for work˺. Those unfamiliar with their situation will think they are not in need ˹of charity˺ because they do not beg. You can recognize them by their appearance. They do not beg people persistently. Whatever you give in charity is certainly well known to God
2|274|Those who spend their wealth in charity day and night, secretly and openly—their reward is with their Lord, and there will be no fear for them, nor will they grieve
2|275|Those who consume interest will stand ˹on Judgment Day˺ like those driven to madness by Satan’s touch. That is because they say, “Trade is no different than interest.” But God has permitted trading and forbidden interest. Whoever refrains—after having received warning from their Lord—may keep their previous gains, and their case is left to God. As for those who persist, it is they who will be the residents of the Fire. They will be there forever
2|276|God has made interest fruitless and charity fruitful. And God does not like any ungrateful evildoer
2|277|Indeed, those who believe, do good, establish prayer, and pay alms-tax will receive their reward from their Lord, and there will be no fear for them, nor will they grieve
2|278|O believers! Fear God, and give up outstanding interest if you are ˹true˺ believers
2|279|If you do not, then beware of a war with God and His Messenger! But if you repent, you may retain your principal—neither inflicting nor suffering harm
2|280|If it is difficult for someone to repay a debt, postpone it until a time of ease. And if you waive it as an act of charity, it will be better for you, if only you knew
2|281|Be mindful of the Day when you will ˹all˺ be returned to God, then every soul will be paid in full for what it has done, and none will be wronged
2|282|O believers! When you contract a loan for a fixed period of time, commit it to writing. Let the scribe maintain justice between the parties. The scribe should not refuse to write as God has taught them to write. They will write what the debtor dictates, bearing God in mind and not defrauding the debt. If the debtor is incompetent, weak, or unable to dictate, let their guardian dictate for them with justice. Call upon two of your men to witness. If two men cannot be found, then one man and two women of your choice will witness—so if one of the women forgets the other may remind her. The witnesses must not refuse when they are summoned. You must not be against writing ˹contracts˺ for a fixed period—whether the sum is small or great. This is more just ˹for you˺ in the sight of God, and more convenient to establish evidence and remove doubts. However, if you conduct an immediate transaction among yourselves, then there is no need for you to record it, but call upon witnesses when a deal is finalized. Let no harm come to the scribe or witnesses. If you do, then you have gravely exceeded ˹your limits˺. Be mindful of God, for God ˹is the One Who˺ teaches you. And God has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all things
2|283|If you are on a journey and a scribe cannot be found, then a security can be taken. If you trust one another, then ˹there is no need for a security, but˺ the debtor should honour this trust ˹by repaying the debt˺—and let them fear God, their Lord. And do not conceal the testimony, for whoever conceals it, their hearts are indeed sinful. And God ˹fully˺ knows what you do
2|284|To God ˹alone˺ belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. Whether you reveal what is in your hearts or conceal it, God will call you to account for it. He forgives whoever He wills, and punishes whoever He wills. And God is Most Capable of everything
2|285|The Messenger ˹firmly˺ believes in what has been revealed to him from his Lord, and so do the believers. They ˹all˺ believe in God, His angels, His Books, and His messengers. ˹They proclaim,˺ “We make no distinction between any of His messengers.” And they say, “We hear and obey. ˹We seek˺ Your forgiveness, our Lord! And to You ˹alone˺ is the final return.”
2|286|God does not require of any soul more than what it can afford. All good will be for its own benefit, and all evil will be to its own loss. ˹The believers pray,˺ “Our Lord! Do not punish us if we forget or make a mistake. Our Lord! Do not place a burden on us like the one you placed on those before us. Our Lord! Do not burden us with what we cannot bear. Pardon us, forgive us, and have mercy on us. You are our ˹only˺ Guardian. So grant us victory over the disbelieving people.”
3|1|Alif-Lãm-Mĩm
3|2|God! There is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him—the Ever-Living, All-Sustaining
3|3|He has revealed to you ˹O Prophet˺ the Book in truth, confirming what came before it, as He revealed the Torah and the Gospel
3|4|previously, as a guide for people, and ˹also˺ revealed the Standard ˹to distinguish between right and wrong˺. Surely those who reject God’s revelations will suffer a severe torment. For God is Almighty, capable of punishment
3|5|Surely nothing on earth or in the heavens is hidden from God
3|6|He is the One Who shapes you in the wombs of your mothers as He wills. There is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him—the Almighty, All-Wise
3|7|He is the One Who has revealed to you ˹O Prophet˺ the Book, of which some verses are precise—they are the foundation of the Book—while others are elusive. Those with deviant hearts follow the elusive verses seeking ˹to spread˺ doubt through their ˹false˺ interpretations—but none grasps their ˹full˺ meaning except God. As for those well-grounded in knowledge, they say, “We believe in this ˹Quran˺—it is all from our Lord.” But none will be mindful ˹of this˺ except people of reason
3|8|˹They say,˺ “Our Lord! Do not let our hearts deviate after you have guided us. Grant us Your mercy. You are indeed the Giver ˹of all bounties˺
3|9|Our Lord! You will certainly gather all humanity for the ˹promised˺ Day—about which there is no doubt. Surely God does not break His promise.”
3|10|Indeed, neither the wealth nor children of the disbelievers will be of any benefit to them against God—and they will be the fuel for the Fire
3|11|Their fate will be like that of the people of Pharaoh and those before them—they all rejected Our signs, so God seized them for their sins. And God is severe in punishment
3|12|˹O Prophet!˺ Tell the disbelievers, “Soon you will be overpowered and driven to Hell—what an evil place to rest!”
3|13|Indeed, there was a sign for you in the two armies that met in battle—one fighting for the cause of God and the other in denial. The believers saw their enemy twice their number. But God supports with His victory whoever He wills. Surely in this is a lesson for people of insight
3|14|The enjoyment of ˹worldly˺ desires—women, children, treasures of gold and silver, fine horses, cattle, and fertile land—has been made appealing to people. These are the pleasures of this worldly life, but with God is the finest destination
3|15|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Shall I inform you of what is better than ˹all of˺ this? Those mindful ˹of God˺ will have Gardens with their Lord under which rivers flow, to stay there forever, and pure spouses, along with God’s pleasure.” And God is All-Seeing of ˹His˺ servants
3|16|who pray, “Our Lord! We have believed, so forgive our sins and protect us from the torment of the Fire.”
3|17|˹It is they˺ who are patient, sincere, obedient, and charitable, and who pray for forgiveness before dawn
3|18|God ˹Himself˺ is a Witness that there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him—and so are the angels and people of knowledge. He is the Maintainer of justice. There is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him—the Almighty, All-Wise
3|19|Certainly, God’s only Way is Islam. Those who were given the Scripture did not dispute ˹among themselves˺ out of mutual envy until knowledge came to them. Whoever denies God’s signs, then surely God is swift in reckoning
3|20|So if they argue with you ˹O Prophet˺, say, “I have submitted myself to God, and so have my followers.” And ask those who were given the Scripture and the illiterate ˹people˺, “Have you submitted yourselves ˹to God˺?” If they submit, they will be ˹rightly˺ guided. But if they turn away, then your duty is only to deliver ˹the message˺. And God is All-Seeing of ˹His˺ servants
3|21|Indeed, those who deny God’s signs, kill the prophets unjustly, and kill people who stand up for justice—give them good news of a painful punishment
3|22|They are the ones whose deeds are wasted in this world and the Hereafter. And they will have no helpers
3|23|Have you not seen those who were given a portion of the Scriptures? Yet when they are invited to the Book of God to settle their disputes, some of them turn away heedlessly
3|24|This is because they say, “The Fire will not touch us except for a few days.” They have been deceived in their faith by their wishful lying
3|25|But how ˹horrible˺ will it be when We gather them together on the Day about which there is no doubt—when every soul will be paid in full for what it has done, and none will be wronged
3|26|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “O God! Lord over all authorities! You give authority to whoever You please and remove it from who You please; You honour whoever You please and disgrace who You please—all good is in Your Hands. Surely You ˹alone˺ are Most Capable of everything
3|27|You cause the night to pass into the day and the day into the night. You bring forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living. And You provide for whoever You will without limit.”
3|28|Believers should not take disbelievers as guardians instead of the believers—and whoever does so will have nothing to hope for from God—unless it is a precaution against their tyranny. And God warns you about Himself. And to God is the final return
3|29|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Whether you conceal what is in your hearts or reveal it, it is known to God. For He knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. And God is Most Capable of everything.”
3|30|˹Watch for˺ the Day when every soul will be presented with whatever good it has done. And it will wish that its misdeeds were far off. And God warns you about Himself. And God is Ever Gracious to ˹His˺ servants
3|31|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “If you ˹sincerely˺ love God, then follow me; God will love you and forgive your sins. For God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful.”
3|32|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Obey God and His Messenger.” If they still turn away, then truly God does not like the disbelievers
3|33|Indeed, God chose Adam, Noah, the family of Abraham, and the family of ’Imrân above all people ˹of their time˺
3|34|They are descendants of one another. And God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing
3|35|˹Remember˺ when the wife of ’Imrân said, “My Lord! I dedicate what is in my womb entirely to Your service, so accept it from me. You ˹alone˺ are truly the All-Hearing, All-Knowing.”
3|36|When she delivered, she said, “My Lord! I have given birth to a girl,”—and God fully knew what she had delivered—“and the male is not like the female. I have named her Mary, and I seek Your protection for her and her offspring from Satan, the accursed.”
3|37|So her Lord accepted her graciously and blessed her with a pleasant upbringing—entrusting her to the care of Zachariah. Whenever Zachariah visited her in the sanctuary, he found her supplied with provisions. He exclaimed, “O Mary! Where did this come from?” She replied, “It is from God. Surely God provides for whoever He wills without limit.”
3|38|Then and there Zachariah prayed to his Lord, saying, “My Lord! Grant me—by your grace—righteous offspring. You are certainly the Hearer of ˹all˺ prayers.”
3|39|So the angels called out to him while he stood praying in the sanctuary, “God gives you good news of ˹the birth of˺ John who will confirm the Word of God and will be a great leader, chaste, and a prophet among the righteous.”
3|40|Zachariah exclaimed, “My Lord! How can I have a son when I am very old and my wife is barren?” He replied, “So will it be. God does what He wills.”
3|41|Zachariah said, “My Lord! Grant me a sign.” He said, “Your sign is that you will not ˹be able to˺ speak to people for three days except through gestures. Remember your Lord often and glorify ˹Him˺ morning and evening.”
3|42|And ˹remember˺ when the angels said, “O Mary! Surely God has selected you, purified you, and chosen you over all women of the world
3|43|O Mary! Be devout to your Lord, prostrate yourself ˹in prayer˺ and bow along with those who bow down.”
3|44|This is news of the unseen that We reveal to you ˹O Prophet˺. You were not with them when they cast lots to decide who would be Mary’s guardian, nor were you there when they argued ˹about it˺
3|45|˹Remember˺ when the angels proclaimed, “O Mary! God gives you good news of a Word from Him, his name will be the Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary; honoured in this world and the Hereafter, and he will be one of those nearest ˹to God˺
3|46|And he will speak to people in ˹his˺ infancy and adulthood and will be one of the righteous.”
3|47|Mary wondered, “My Lord! How can I have a child when no man has ever touched me?” An angel replied, “So will it be. God creates what He wills. When He decrees a matter, He simply tells it, ‘Be!’ And it is
3|48|And God will teach him writing and wisdom, the Torah and the Gospel
3|49|and ˹make him˺ a messenger to the Children of Israel ˹to proclaim,˺ ‘I have come to you with a sign from your Lord: I will make for you a bird from clay, breathe into it, and it will become a ˹real˺ bird—by God’s Will. I will heal the blind and the leper and raise the dead to life—by God’s Will. And I will prophesize what you eat and store in your houses. Surely in this is a sign for you if you ˹truly˺ believe
3|50|And I will confirm the Torah revealed before me and legalize some of what had been forbidden to you. I have come to you with a sign from your Lord, so be mindful of God and obey me
3|51|Surely God is my Lord and your Lord. So worship Him ˹alone˺. This is the Straight Path.’”
3|52|When Jesus sensed disbelief from his people, he asked, “Who will stand up with me for God?” The disciples replied, “We will stand up for God. We believe in God, so bear witness that we have submitted.”
3|53|˹They prayed to God,˺ “Our Lord! We believe in Your revelations and follow the messenger, so count us among those who bear witness.”
3|54|And the disbelievers made a plan ˹against Jesus˺, but God also planned—and God is the best of planners
3|55|˹Remember˺ when God said, “O Jesus! I will take you and raise you up to Myself. I will deliver you from those who disbelieve, and elevate your followers above the disbelievers until the Day of Judgment. Then to Me you will ˹all˺ return, and I will settle all your disputes
3|56|As for those who disbelieve, I will subject them to a severe punishment in this life and the Hereafter, and they will have no helpers
3|57|And as for those who believe and do good, they will be rewarded in full. And God does not like the wrongdoers.”
3|58|We recite ˹all˺ this to you ˹O Prophet˺ as one of the signs and ˹as˺ a wise reminder
3|59|Indeed, the example of Jesus in the sight of God is like that of Adam. He created him from dust, then said to him, “Be!” And he was
3|60|This is the truth from your Lord, so do not be one of those who doubt
3|61|Now, whoever disputes with you ˹O Prophet˺ concerning Jesus after full knowledge has come to you, say, “Come! Let us gather our children and your children, our women and your women, ourselves and yourselves—then let us sincerely invoke God’s curse upon the liars.”
3|62|Certainly, this is the true narrative, and there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except God. And indeed, God ˹alone˺ is the Almighty, All-Wise
3|63|If they turn away, then surely God has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of the corruptors
3|64|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “O People of the Book! Let us come to common terms: that we will worship none but God, associate none with Him, nor take one another as lords instead of God.” But if they turn away, then say, “Bear witness that we have submitted ˹to God alone˺.”
3|65|O People of the Book! Why do you argue about Abraham, while the Torah and the Gospel were not revealed until long after him? Do you not understand
3|66|Here you are! You disputed about what you have ˹little˺ knowledge of, but why do you now argue about what you have no knowledge of? God knows and you do not know
3|67|Abraham was neither a Jew nor a Christian; he submitted in all uprightness and was not a polytheist
3|68|Indeed, those who have the best claim to Abraham are his followers, this Prophet, and the believers. And God is the Guardian of those who believe
3|69|Some of the People of the Book wish to mislead you ˹believers˺. They mislead none but themselves, yet they fail to perceive it
3|70|O People of the Book! Why do you reject the signs of God while you bear witness ˹to their truth˺
3|71|O People of the Book! Why do you mix the truth with falsehood and hide the truth knowingly
3|72|A group among the People of the Book said ˹to one another˺, “Believe in what has been revealed to the believers in the morning and reject it in the evening, so they may abandon their faith
3|73|And only believe those who follow your religion.” Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Surely, ˹the only˺ true guidance is God’s guidance.” ˹They also said,˺ “Do not believe that someone will receive ˹revealed˺ knowledge similar to yours or argue against you before your Lord.” Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Indeed, all bounty is in the Hands of God—He grants it to whoever He wills. And God is All-Bountiful, All-Knowing.”
3|74|He chooses whoever He wills to receive His mercy. And God is the Lord of infinite bounty
3|75|There are some among the People of the Book who, if entrusted with a stack of gold, will readily return it. Yet there are others who, if entrusted with a single coin, will not repay it unless you constantly demand it. This is because they say, “We are not accountable for ˹exploiting˺ the Gentiles.” And ˹so˺ they attribute lies to God knowingly
3|76|Absolutely! Those who honour their trusts and shun evil—surely God loves those who are mindful ˹of Him˺
3|77|Indeed, those who trade God’s covenant and their oaths for a fleeting gain will have no share in the Hereafter. God will neither speak to them, nor look at them, nor purify them on the Day of Judgment. And they will suffer a painful punishment
3|78|There are some among them who distort the Book with their tongues to make you think this ˹distortion˺ is from the Book—but it is not what the Book says. They say, “It is from God”—but it is not from God. And ˹so˺ they attribute lies to God knowingly
3|79|It is not appropriate for someone who God has blessed with the Scripture, wisdom, and prophethood to say to people, “Worship me instead of God.” Rather, he would say, “Be devoted to the worship of your Lord ˹alone˺”—in accordance with what these prophets read in the Scripture and what they taught
3|80|And he would never ask you to take angels and prophets as lords. Would he ask you to disbelieve after you have submitted
3|81|˹Remember˺ when God made a covenant with the prophets, ˹saying,˺ “Now that I have given you the Book and wisdom, if there comes to you a messenger confirming what you have, you must believe in him and support him.” He added, “Do you affirm this covenant and accept this commitment?” They said, “Yes, we do.” God said, “Then bear witness, and I too am a Witness.”
3|82|Whoever turns back after this, they will be the rebellious
3|83|Do they desire a way other than God’s—knowing that all those in the heavens and the earth submit to His Will, willingly or unwillingly, and to Him they will ˹all˺ be returned
3|84|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “We believe in God and what has been revealed to us and what was revealed to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and his descendants; and what was given to Moses, Jesus, and other prophets from their Lord—we make no distinction between any of them, and to Him we ˹fully˺ submit.”
3|85|Whoever seeks a way other than Islam, it will never be accepted from them, and in the Hereafter they will be among the losers
3|86|How will God guide a people who chose to disbelieve after they had believed, acknowledged the Messenger to be true, and received clear proofs? For God does not guide the wrongdoing people
3|87|Their reward is that they will be condemned by God, the angels, and all of humanity
3|88|They will be in Hell forever. Their punishment will not be lightened, nor will they be delayed ˹from it˺
3|89|As for those who repent afterwards and mend their ways, then surely God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
3|90|Indeed, those who disbelieve after having believed then increase in disbelief, their repentance will never be accepted. It is they who are astray
3|91|Indeed, if each of those who disbelieve then die as disbelievers were to offer a ransom of enough gold to fill the whole world, it would never be accepted from them. It is they who will suffer a painful punishment, and they will have no helpers
3|92|You will never achieve righteousness until you donate some of what you cherish. And whatever you give is certainly well known to God
3|93|All food was lawful for the children of Israel, except what Israel made unlawful for himself before the Torah was revealed. Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Bring the Torah and read it, if your claims are true.”
3|94|Then whoever still fabricates lies about God, they will be the ˹true˺ wrongdoers
3|95|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “God has declared the truth. So follow the Way of Abraham, the upright—who was not a polytheist.”
3|96|Surely the first House ˹of worship˺ established for humanity is the one at Bakkah—a blessed sanctuary and a guide for ˹all˺ people
3|97|In it are clear signs and the standing-place of Abraham. Whoever enters it should be safe. Pilgrimage to this House is an obligation by God upon whoever is able among the people. And whoever disbelieves, then surely God is not in need of ˹any of His˺ creation
3|98|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “O People of the Book! Why do you deny the revelations of God, when God is a Witness to what you do?”
3|99|Say, “O People of the Book! Why do you turn the believers away from the Way of God—striving to make it ˹appear˺ crooked, while you are witnesses ˹to its truth˺? And God is never unaware of what you do.”
3|100|O believers! If you were to yield to a group of those who were given the Scripture, they would turn you back from belief to disbelief
3|101|How can you disbelieve when God’s revelations are recited to you and His Messenger is in your midst? Whoever holds firmly to God is surely guided to the Straight Path
3|102|O believers! Be mindful of God in the way He deserves, and do not die except in ˹a state of full˺ submission ˹to Him˺
3|103|And hold firmly to the rope of God and do not be divided. Remember God’s favour upon you when you were enemies, then He united your hearts, so you—by His grace—became brothers. And you were at the brink of a fiery pit and He saved you from it. This is how God makes His revelations clear to you, so that you may be ˹rightly˺ guided
3|104|Let there be a group among you who call ˹others˺ to goodness, encourage what is good, and forbid what is evil—it is they who will be successful
3|105|And do not be like those who split ˹into sects˺ and differed after clear proofs had come to them. It is they who will suffer a tremendous punishment
3|106|On that Day some faces will be bright while others gloomy. To the gloomy-faced it will be said, “Did you disbelieve after having believed? So taste the punishment for your disbelief.”
3|107|As for the bright-faced, they will be in God’s mercy, where they will remain forever
3|108|These are God’s revelations We recite to you ˹O Prophet˺ in truth. And God desires no injustice to ˹His˺ creation
3|109|To God ˹alone˺ belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. And to God ˹all˺ matters will be returned ˹for judgment˺
3|110|You are the best community ever raised for humanity—you encourage good, forbid evil, and believe in God. Had the People of the Book believed, it would have been better for them. Some of them are faithful, but most are rebellious
3|111|They can never inflict harm on you, except a little annoyance. But if they meet you in battle, they will flee and they will have no helpers
3|112|They will be stricken with disgrace wherever they go, unless they are protected by a covenant with God or a treaty with the people. They have invited the displeasure of God and have been branded with misery for rejecting God’s revelations and murdering ˹His˺ prophets unjustly. This is ˹a fair reward˺ for their disobedience and violations
3|113|Yet they are not all alike: there are some among the People of the Book who are upright, who recite God’s revelations throughout the night, prostrating ˹in prayer˺
3|114|They believe in God and the Last Day, encourage good and forbid evil, and race with one another in doing good. They are ˹truly˺ among the righteous
3|115|They will never be denied the reward for any good they have done. And God has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of those mindful ˹of Him˺
3|116|Indeed, neither the wealth nor children of the disbelievers will be of any benefit to them against God. It is they who will be the residents of the Fire. They will be there forever
3|117|The good they do in this worldly life is like the harvest of an evil people struck by a bitter wind, destroying it ˹completely˺. God never wronged them, but they wronged themselves
3|118|O believers! Do not associate closely with others who would not miss a chance to harm you. Their only desire is to see you suffer. Their prejudice has become evident from what they say—and what their hearts hide is far worse. We have made Our revelations clear to you, if only you understood
3|119|Here you are! You love them but they do not love you, and you believe in all Scriptures. When they meet you they say, “We believe.” But when alone, they bite their fingertips in rage. Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “˹May you˺ die of your rage!” Surely God knows best what is ˹hidden˺ in the heart
3|120|When you ˹believers˺ are touched with good, they grieve; but when you are afflicted with evil, they rejoice. ˹Yet,˺ if you are patient and mindful ˹of God˺, their schemes will not harm you in the least. Surely God is Fully Aware of what they do
3|121|˹Remember, O Prophet,˺ when you left your home in the early morning to position the believers in the battlefield. And God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing
3|122|˹Remember˺ when two groups among you ˹believers˺ were about to cower, then God reassured them. So in God let the believers put their trust
3|123|Indeed, God made you victorious at Badr when you were ˹vastly˺ outnumbered. So be mindful of God, perhaps you will be grateful
3|124|˹Remember, O Prophet,˺ when you said to the believers, “Is it not enough that your Lord will send down a reinforcement of three thousand angels for your aid?”
3|125|Most certainly, if you ˹believers˺ are firm and mindful ˹of God˺ and the enemy launches a sudden attack on you, God will reinforce you with five thousand angels designated ˹for battle˺
3|126|God ordained this ˹reinforcement˺ only as good news for you and reassurance for your hearts. And victory comes only from God—the Almighty, All-Wise—
3|127|to destroy a group of the disbelievers and humble the rest, causing them to withdraw in disappointment
3|128|You ˹O Prophet˺ have no say in the matter. It is up to God to turn to them in mercy or punish them, for indeed they are wrongdoers
3|129|To God ˹alone˺ belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. He forgives whoever He wills, and punishes whoever He wills. And God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
3|130|O believers! Do not consume interest, multiplying it many times over. And be mindful of God, so you may prosper
3|131|Guard yourselves against the Fire prepared for the disbelievers
3|132|Obey God and the Messenger, so you may be shown mercy
3|133|And hasten towards forgiveness from your Lord and a Paradise as vast as the heavens and the earth, prepared for those mindful ˹of God˺
3|134|˹They are˺ those who donate in prosperity and adversity, control their anger, and pardon others. And God loves the good-doers
3|135|˹They are˺ those who, upon committing an evil deed or wronging themselves, remember God and seek forgiveness and do not knowingly persist in sin—and who forgives sins except God
3|136|Their reward is forgiveness from their Lord and Gardens under which rivers flow, staying there forever. How excellent is the reward for those who work ˹righteousness˺
3|137|Similar situations came to pass before you, so travel throughout the land and see the fate of the deniers
3|138|This is an insight to humanity—a guide and a lesson to the God-fearing
3|139|Do not falter or grieve, for you will have the upper hand, if you are ˹true˺ believers
3|140|If you have suffered injuries ˹at Uḥud˺, they suffered similarly ˹at Badr˺. We alternate these days ˹of victory and defeat˺ among people so that God may reveal the ˹true˺ believers, choose martyrs from among you—and God does not like the wrongdoers—
3|141|and distinguish the ˹true˺ believers and destroy the disbelievers
3|142|Do you think you will enter Paradise without God proving which of you ˹truly˺ struggled ˹for His cause˺ and patiently endured
3|143|You certainly wished ˹for the opportunity˺ for martyrdom before encountering it, now you have seen it with your own eyes
3|144|Muḥammad is no more than a messenger; other messengers have gone before him. If he were to die or to be killed, would you regress into disbelief? Those who do so will not harm God whatsoever. And God will reward those who are grateful
3|145|No soul can ever die without God’s Will at the destined time. Those who desire worldly gain, We will let them have it, and those who desire heavenly reward, We will grant it to them. And We will reward those who are grateful
3|146|˹Imagine˺ how many devotees fought along with their prophets and never faltered despite whatever ˹losses˺ they suffered in the cause of God, nor did they weaken or give in! God loves those who persevere
3|147|And all they said was, “Our Lord! Forgive our sins and excesses, make our steps firm, and grant us victory over the disbelieving people.”
3|148|So God gave them the reward of this world and the excellent reward of the Hereafter. For God loves the good-doers
3|149|O believers! If you yield to the disbelievers, they will drag you back to disbelief—and you will become losers
3|150|But no! God is your Guardian, and He is the best Helper
3|151|We will cast horror into the hearts of the disbelievers for associating ˹false gods˺ with God—a practice He has never authorized. The Fire will be their home—what an evil place for the wrongdoers to stay
3|152|Indeed, God fulfilled His promise to you when you ˹initially˺ swept them away by His Will, then your courage weakened and you disputed about the command and disobeyed, after God had brought victory within your reach. Some of you were after worldly gain while others desired a heavenly reward. He denied you victory over them as a test, yet He has pardoned you. And God is Gracious to the believers
3|153|˹Remember˺ when you were running far away ˹in panic˺—not looking at anyone—while the Messenger was calling to you from behind! So God rewarded your disobedience with distress upon distress. Now, do not grieve over the victory you were denied or the injury you suffered. And God is All-Aware of what you do
3|154|Then after distress, He sent down serenity in the form of drowsiness overcoming some of you, while others were disturbed by evil thoughts about God—the thoughts of ˹pre-Islamic˺ ignorance. They ask, “Do we have a say in the matter?” Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “All matters are destined by God.” They conceal in their hearts what they do not reveal to you. They say ˹to themselves˺, “If we had any say in the matter, none of us would have come to die here.” Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Even if you were to remain in your homes, those among you who were destined to be killed would have met the same fate.” Through this, God tests what is within you and purifies what is in your hearts. And God knows best what is ˹hidden˺ in the heart
3|155|Indeed, those ˹believers˺ who fled on the day when the two armies met were made to slip by Satan because of their misdeeds. But God has pardoned them. Surely God is All-Forgiving, Most Forbearing
3|156|O believers! Do not be like the unfaithful who say about their brothers who travel throughout the land or engage in battle, “If they had stayed with us, they would not have died or been killed.” God makes such thinking a cause of agony in their hearts. It is God who gives life and causes death. And God is All-Seeing of what you do
3|157|Should you be martyred or die in the cause of God, then His forgiveness and mercy are far better than whatever ˹wealth˺ those ˹who stay behind˺ accumulate
3|158|Whether you die or are martyred—all of you will be gathered before God
3|159|It is out of God’s mercy that you ˹O Prophet˺ have been lenient with them. Had you been cruel or hard-hearted, they would have certainly abandoned you. So pardon them, ask God’s forgiveness for them, and consult with them in ˹conducting˺ matters. Once you make a decision, put your trust in God. Surely God loves those who trust in Him
3|160|If God helps you, none can defeat you. But if He denies you help, then who else can help you? So in God let the believers put their trust
3|161|It is not appropriate for a prophet to illegally withhold spoils of war. And whoever does so, it will be held against them on the Day of Judgment. Then every soul will be paid in full for what it has done, and none will be wronged
3|162|Are those who seek God’s pleasure like those who deserve God’s wrath? Hell is their home. What an evil destination
3|163|They ˹each˺ have varying degrees in the sight of God. And God is All-Seeing of what they do
3|164|Indeed, God has done the believers a ˹great˺ favour by raising a messenger from among them—reciting to them His revelations, purifying them, and teaching them the Book and wisdom. For indeed they had previously been clearly astray
3|165|Why is it when you suffered casualties ˹at Uḥud˺—although you had made your enemy suffer twice as much ˹at Badr˺—you protested, “How could this be?”? Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “It is because of your disobedience.” Surely God is Most Capable of everything
3|166|So what you suffered on the day the two armies met was by God’s Will, so that He might distinguish the ˹true˺ believers
3|167|and expose the hypocrites. When it was said to them, “Come fight in the cause of God or ˹at least˺ defend yourselves,” they replied, “If we had known there was fighting, we would have definitely gone with you.” They were closer to disbelief than to belief on that day—for saying with their mouths what was not in their hearts. God is All-Knowing of what they hide
3|168|Those who sat at home, saying about their brothers, “Had they listened to us, they would not have been killed.” Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Try not to die if what you say is true!”
3|169|Never think of those martyred in the cause of God as dead. In fact, they are alive with their Lord, well provided for—
3|170|rejoicing in God’s bounties and being delighted for those yet to join them. There will be no fear for them, nor will they grieve
3|171|They are joyful for receiving God’s grace and bounty, and that God does not deny the reward of the believers
3|172|˹As for˺ those who responded to the call of God and His Messenger after their injury, those of them who did good and were mindful ˹of God˺ will have a great reward
3|173|Those who were warned, “Your enemies have mobilized their forces against you, so fear them,” the warning only made them grow stronger in faith and they replied, “God ˹alone˺ is sufficient ˹as an aid˺ for us and ˹He˺ is the best Protector.”
3|174|So they returned with God’s favours and grace, suffering no harm. For they sought to please God. And surely God is ˹the˺ Lord of infinite bounty
3|175|That ˹warning˺ was only ˹from˺ Satan, trying to prompt you to fear his followers. So do not fear them; fear Me if you are ˹true˺ believers
3|176|˹O Prophet!˺ Do not grieve for those who race to disbelieve—surely they will not harm God in the least. It is God’s Will to disallow them a share in the Hereafter, and they will suffer a tremendous punishment
3|177|Those who trade belief for disbelief will never harm God in the least, and they will suffer a painful punishment
3|178|Those who disbelieve should not think that living longer is good for them. They are only given more time to increase in sin, and they will suffer a humiliating punishment
3|179|God would not leave the believers in the condition you were in, until He distinguished the good from the evil ˹among you˺. Nor would God ˹directly˺ reveal to you the unseen, but He chooses whoever He wills as a messenger. So believe in God and His messengers. And if you are faithful and mindful ˹of God˺, you will receive a great reward
3|180|And do not let those who ˹greedily˺ withhold God’s bounties think it is good for them—in fact, it is bad for them! They will be leashed ˹by their necks˺ on the Day of Judgment with whatever ˹wealth˺ they used to withhold. And God is the ˹sole˺ inheritor of the heavens and the earth. And God is All-Aware of what you do
3|181|Indeed, God has heard those ˹among the Jews˺ who said, “God is poor; we are rich!” We have certainly recorded their slurs and their killing of prophets unjustly. Then We will say, “Taste the torment of burning
3|182|This is ˹the reward˺ for what your hands have done. And God is never unjust to ˹His˺ creation.”
3|183|Those ˹are the same people˺ who say, “God has commanded us not to believe in any messenger unless he brings us an offering to be consumed by fire ˹from the sky˺.” Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Other prophets did in fact come to you before me with clear proofs and ˹even˺ what you demanded—why then did you kill them, if what you say is true?”
3|184|If you are rejected by them, so too were messengers before you who came with clear proofs, divine Books, and enlightening Scriptures
3|185|Every soul will taste death. And you will only receive your full reward on the Day of Judgment. Whoever is spared from the Fire and is admitted into Paradise will ˹indeed˺ triumph, whereas the life of this world is no more than the delusion of enjoyment
3|186|You ˹believers˺ will surely be tested in your wealth and yourselves, and you will certainly hear many hurtful words from those who were given the Scripture before you and ˹from˺ the polytheists. But if you are patient and mindful ˹of God˺—surely this is a resolve to aspire to
3|187|˹Remember, O Prophet,˺ when God took the covenant of those who were given the Scripture to make it known to people and not hide it, yet they cast it behind their backs and traded it for a fleeting gain. What a miserable profit
3|188|Do not let those who rejoice in their misdeeds and love to take credit for what they have not done think they will escape torment. They will suffer a painful punishment
3|189|To God ˹alone˺ belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. And God is Most Capable of everything
3|190|Indeed, in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the day and night there are signs for people of reason
3|191|˹They are˺ those who remember God while standing, sitting, and lying on their sides, and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth ˹and pray˺, “Our Lord! You have not created ˹all of˺ this without purpose. Glory be to You! Protect us from the torment of the Fire
3|192|Our Lord! Indeed, those You commit to the Fire will be ˹completely˺ disgraced! And the wrongdoers will have no helpers
3|193|Our Lord! We have heard the caller to ˹true˺ belief, ˹proclaiming,˺ ‘Believe in your Lord ˹alone˺,’ so we believed. Our Lord! Forgive our sins, absolve us of our misdeeds, and allow us ˹each˺ to die as one of the virtuous
3|194|Our Lord! Grant us what You have promised us through Your messengers and do not put us to shame on Judgment Day—for certainly You never fail in Your promise.”
3|195|So their Lord responded to them: “I will never deny any of you—male or female—the reward of your deeds. Both are equal in reward. Those who migrated or were expelled from their homes, and were persecuted for My sake and fought and ˹some˺ were martyred—I will certainly forgive their sins and admit them into Gardens under which rivers flow, as a reward from God. And with God is the finest reward!”
3|196|Do not be deceived by the prosperity of the disbelievers throughout the land
3|197|It is only a brief enjoyment. Then Hell will be their home—what an evil place to rest
3|198|But those who are mindful of their Lord will be in Gardens under which rivers flow, to stay there forever—as an accommodation from God. And what is with God is best for the virtuous
3|199|Indeed, there are some among the People of the Book who truly believe in God and what has been revealed to you ˹believers˺ and what was revealed to them. They humble themselves before God—never trading God’s revelations for a fleeting gain. Their reward is with their Lord. Surely God is swift in reckoning
3|200|O believers! Patiently endure, persevere, stand on guard, and be mindful of God, so you may be successful
4|1|O humanity! Be mindful of your Lord Who created you from a single soul, and from it He created its mate, and through both He spread countless men and women. And be mindful of God—in Whose Name you appeal to one another—and ˹honour˺ family ties. Surely God is ever Watchful over you
4|2|Give orphans their wealth ˹when they reach maturity˺, and do not exchange your worthless possessions for their valuables, nor cheat them by mixing their wealth with your own. For this would indeed be a great sin
4|3|If you fear you might fail to give orphan women their ˹due˺ rights ˹if you were to marry them˺, then marry other women of your choice—two, three, or four. But if you are afraid you will fail to maintain justice, then ˹content yourselves with˺ one or those ˹bondwomen˺ in your possession. This way you are less likely to commit injustice
4|4|Give women ˹you wed˺ their due dowries graciously. But if they waive some of it willingly, then you may enjoy it freely with a clear conscience
4|5|Do not entrust the incapable ˹among your dependants˺ with your wealth which God has made a means of support for you—but feed and clothe them from it, and speak to them kindly
4|6|Test ˹the competence of˺ the orphans until they reach a marriageable age. Then if you feel they are capable of sound judgment, return their wealth to them. And do not consume it wastefully and hastily before they grow up ˹to demand it˺. If the guardian is well-off, they should not take compensation; but if the guardian is poor, let them take a reasonable provision. When you give orphans back their property, call in witnesses. And sufficient is God as a ˹vigilant˺ Reckoner
4|7|For men there is a share in what their parents and close relatives leave, and for women there is a share in what their parents and close relatives leave—whether it is little or much. ˹These are˺ obligatory shares
4|8|If ˹non-inheriting˺ relatives, orphans, or the needy are present at the time of distribution, offer them a ˹small˺ provision from it and speak to them kindly
4|9|Let the guardians be as concerned ˹for the orphans˺ as they would if they were to ˹die and˺ leave ˹their own˺ helpless children behind. So let them be mindful of God and speak equitably
4|10|Indeed, those who unjustly consume orphans’ wealth ˹in fact˺ consume nothing but fire into their bellies. And they will be burned in a blazing Hell
4|11|God commands you regarding your children: the share of the male will be twice that of the female. If you leave only two ˹or more˺ females, their share is two-thirds of the estate. But if there is only one female, her share will be one-half. Each parent is entitled to one-sixth if you leave offspring. But if you are childless and your parents are the only heirs, then your mother will receive one-third. But if you leave siblings, then your mother will receive one-sixth—after the fulfilment of bequests and debts. ˹Be fair to˺ your parents and children, as you do not ˹fully˺ know who is more beneficial to you. ˹This is˺ an obligation from God. Surely God is All-Knowing, All-Wise
4|12|You will inherit half of what your wives leave if they are childless. But if they have children, then ˹your share is˺ one-fourth of the estate—after the fulfilment of bequests and debts. And your wives will inherit one-fourth of what you leave if you are childless. But if you have children, then your wives will receive one-eighth of your estate—after the fulfilment of bequests and debts. And if a man or a woman leaves neither parents nor children but only a brother or a sister ˹from their mother’s side˺, they will each inherit one-sixth, but if they are more than one, they ˹all˺ will share one-third of the estate—after the fulfilment of bequests and debts without harm ˹to the heirs˺. ˹This is˺ a commandment from God. And God is All-Knowing, Most Forbearing
4|13|These ˹entitlements˺ are the limits set by God. Whoever obeys God and His Messenger will be admitted into Gardens under which rivers flow, to stay there forever. That is the ultimate triumph
4|14|But whoever disobeys God and His Messenger and exceeds their limits will be cast into Hell, to stay there forever. And they will suffer a humiliating punishment
4|15|˹As for˺ those of your women who commit illegal intercourse—call four witnesses from among yourselves. If they testify, confine the offenders to their homes until they die or God ordains a ˹different˺ way for them
4|16|And the two among you who commit this sin—discipline them. If they repent and mend their ways, relieve them. Surely God is ever Accepting of Repentance, Most Merciful
4|17|God only accepts the repentance of those who commit evil ignorantly ˹or recklessly˺ then repent soon after—God will pardon them. And God is All-Knowing, All-Wise
4|18|However, repentance is not accepted from those who knowingly persist in sin until they start dying, and then cry, “Now I repent!” nor those who die as disbelievers. For them We have prepared a painful punishment
4|19|O believers! It is not permissible for you to inherit women against their will or mistreat them to make them return some of the dowry ˹as a ransom for divorce˺—unless they are found guilty of adultery. Treat them fairly. If you happen to dislike them, you may hate something which God turns into a great blessing
4|20|If you desire to replace a wife with another and you have given the former ˹even˺ a stack of gold ˹as a dowry˺, do not take any of it back. Would you ˹still˺ take it unjustly and very sinfully
4|21|And how could you take it back after having enjoyed each other intimately and she has taken from you a firm commitment
4|22|Do not marry former wives of your fathers—except what was done previously. It was indeed a shameful, despicable, and evil practice
4|23|˹Also˺ forbidden to you for marriage are your mothers, your daughters, your sisters, your paternal and maternal aunts, your brother’s daughters, your sister’s daughters, your foster-mothers, your foster-sisters, your mothers-in-law, your stepdaughters under your guardianship if you have consummated marriage with their mothers—but if you have not, then you can marry them—nor the wives of your own sons, nor two sisters together at the same time—except what was done previously. Surely God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
4|24|Also ˹forbidden are˺ married women—except ˹female˺ captives in your possession. This is God’s commandment to you. Lawful to you are all beyond these—as long as you seek them with your wealth in a legal marriage, not in fornication. Give those you have consummated marriage with their due dowries. It is permissible to be mutually gracious regarding the set dowry. Surely God is All-Knowing, All-Wise
4|25|But if any of you cannot afford to marry a free believing woman, then ˹let him marry˺ a believing bondwoman possessed by one of you. God knows best ˹the state of˺ your faith ˹and theirs˺. You are from one another. So marry them with the permission of their owners, giving them their dowry in fairness, if they are chaste, neither promiscuous nor having secret affairs. If they commit indecency after marriage, they receive half the punishment of free women. This is for those of you who fear falling into sin. But if you are patient, it is better for you. And God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
4|26|It is God’s Will to make things clear to you, guide you to the ˹noble˺ ways of those before you, and turn to you in mercy. For God is All-Knowing, All-Wise
4|27|And it is God’s Will to turn to you in grace, but those who follow their desires wish to see you deviate entirely ˹from God’s Way˺
4|28|And it is God’s Will to lighten your burdens, for humankind was created weak
4|29|O believers! Do not devour one another’s wealth illegally, but rather trade by mutual consent. And do not kill ˹each other or˺ yourselves. Surely God is ever Merciful to you
4|30|And whoever does this sinfully and unjustly, We will burn them in the Fire. That is easy for God
4|31|If you avoid the major sins forbidden to you, We will absolve you of your ˹lesser˺ misdeeds and admit you into a place of honour
4|32|And do not crave what God has given some of you over others. Men will be rewarded according to their deeds and women ˹equally˺ according to theirs. Rather, ask God for His bounties. Surely God has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all things
4|33|And We have appointed heirs to what has been left by parents and next of kin. As for those you have made a pledge to, give them their share. Surely God is a Witness over all things
4|34|Men are the caretakers of women, as men have been provisioned by God over women and tasked with supporting them financially. And righteous women are devoutly obedient and, when alone, protective of what God has entrusted them with. And if you sense ill-conduct from your women, advise them ˹first˺, ˹if they persist,˺ do not share their beds, ˹but if they still persist,˺ then discipline them ˹gently˺. But if they change their ways, do not be unjust to them. Surely God is Most High, All-Great
4|35|If you anticipate a split between them, appoint a mediator from his family and another from hers. If they desire reconciliation, God will restore harmony between them. Surely God is All-Knowing, All-Aware
4|36|Worship God ˹alone˺ and associate none with Him. And be kind to parents, relatives, orphans, the poor, near and distant neighbours, close friends, ˹needy˺ travellers, and those ˹bondspeople˺ in your possession. Surely God does not like whoever is arrogant, boastful—
4|37|those who are stingy, promote stinginess among people, and withhold God’s bounties. We have prepared for the disbelievers a humiliating punishment
4|38|Likewise for those who spend their wealth to show off and do not believe in God or the Last Day. And whoever takes Satan as an associate—what an evil associate they have
4|39|What harm could have come to them if they had believed in God and the Last Day and donated from what God has provided for them? And God has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of them
4|40|Indeed, God never wrongs ˹anyone˺—even by an atom’s weight. And if it is a good deed, He will multiply it many times over and will give a great reward out of His grace
4|41|So how will it be when We bring a witness from every faith-community and bring you ˹O Prophet˺ as a witness against yours
4|42|On that Day, those who denied ˹God˺ and disobeyed the Messenger will wish they were reduced to dust. And they will never be able to hide anything from God
4|43|O believers! Do not approach prayer while intoxicated until you are aware of what you say, nor in a state of ˹full˺ impurity—unless you merely pass through ˹the mosque˺—until you have bathed. But if you are ill, on a journey, or have relieved yourselves, or been intimate with your wives and cannot find water, then purify yourselves with clean earth, wiping your faces and hands. And God is Ever-Pardoning, All-Forgiving
4|44|Have you ˹O Prophet˺ not seen those who were given a portion of the Scriptures yet trade it for misguidance and wish to see you deviate from the ˹Right˺ Path
4|45|God knows best who your enemies are! And God is sufficient as a Guardian, and He is sufficient as a Helper
4|46|Some Jews take words out of context and say, “We listen and we disobey,” “Hear! May you never hear,” and “Râ’ina!” [Herd us!]—playing with words and discrediting the faith. Had they said ˹courteously˺, “We hear and obey,” “Listen to us,” and “Unẓurna,” [Tend to us!] it would have been better for them and more proper. God has condemned them for their disbelief, so they do not believe except for a few
4|47|O you who were given the Book! Believe in what We have revealed—confirming your own Scriptures—before We wipe out ˹your˺ faces, turning them backwards, or We condemn the defiant as We did to the Sabbath-breakers. And God’s command is always executed
4|48|Indeed, God does not forgive associating others with Him ˹in worship˺, but forgives anything else of whoever He wills. And whoever associates others with God has indeed committed a grave sin
4|49|Have you ˹O Prophet˺ not seen those who ˹falsely˺ elevate themselves? It is God who elevates whoever He wills. And none will be wronged ˹even by the width of˺ the thread of a date stone
4|50|See how they fabricate lies against God—this alone is a blatant sin
4|51|Have you ˹O Prophet˺ not seen those who were given a portion of the Scriptures yet believe in idols and false gods and reassure the disbelievers that they are better guided than the believers
4|52|It is they who have been condemned by God. And whoever is condemned by God will have no helper
4|53|Do they have control over shares of the kingdom? If so, they would not have given anyone so much as the speck on a date stone
4|54|Or do they envy the people for God’s bounties? Indeed, We have given the descendants of Abraham the Book and wisdom, along with great authority
4|55|Yet some believed in him while others turned away from him. Hell is sufficient as a torment
4|56|Surely those who reject Our signs, We will cast them into the Fire. Whenever their skin is burnt completely, We will replace it so they will ˹constantly˺ taste the punishment. Indeed, God is Almighty, All-Wise
4|57|As for those who believe and do good, We will admit them into Gardens under which rivers flow, to stay there for ever and ever. There they will have pure spouses, and We will place them under a vast shade
4|58|Indeed, God commands you to return trusts to their rightful owners; and when you judge between people, judge with fairness. What a noble commandment from God to you! Surely God is All-Hearing, All-Seeing
4|59|O believers! Obey God and obey the Messenger and those in authority among you. Should you disagree on anything, then refer it to God and His Messenger, if you ˹truly˺ believe in God and the Last Day. This is the best and fairest resolution
4|60|Have you ˹O Prophet˺ not seen those who claim they believe in what has been revealed to you and what was revealed before you? They seek the judgment of false judges, which they were commanded to reject. And Satan ˹only˺ desires to lead them farther away
4|61|When it is said to them, “Come to God’s revelations and to the Messenger,” you see the hypocrites turn away from you stubbornly
4|62|How ˹horrible˺ will it be if a disaster strikes them because of what their hands have done, then they come to you swearing by God, “We intended nothing but goodwill and reconciliation.”
4|63|˹Only˺ God knows what is in their hearts. So turn away from them, caution them, and give them advice that will shake their very souls
4|64|We only sent messengers to be obeyed by God’s Will. If only those ˹hypocrites˺ came to you ˹O Prophet˺—after wronging themselves—seeking God’s forgiveness and the Messenger prayed for their forgiveness, they would have certainly found God ever Accepting of Repentance, Most Merciful
4|65|But no! By your Lord, they will never be ˹true˺ believers until they accept you ˹O Prophet˺ as the judge in their disputes, and find no resistance within themselves against your decision and submit wholeheartedly
4|66|If We had commanded them to sacrifice themselves or abandon their homes, none would have obeyed except for a few. Had they done what they were advised to do, it would have certainly been far better for them and more reassuring
4|67|and We would have granted them a great reward by Our grace
4|68|and guided them to the Straight Path
4|69|And whoever obeys God and the Messenger will be in the company of those blessed by God: the prophets, the people of truth, the martyrs, and the righteous—what honourable company
4|70|This is God’s favour, and God fully knows ˹who deserves it˺
4|71|O believers! Take your precautions and go forth either in groups or together
4|72|There will be some among you who will lag behind so that if you face a disaster, they will say, “God has blessed us for not being there among them.”
4|73|But if you return with God’s bounties, they will say—as if there had been no bond between you—“We wish we had been there with them to share the great gain!”
4|74|Let those who would sacrifice this life for the Hereafter fight in the cause of God. And whoever fights in God’s cause—whether they achieve martyrdom or victory—We will honour them with a great reward
4|75|And what is it with you? You do not fight in the cause of God and for oppressed men, women, and children who cry out, “Our Lord! Deliver us from this land of oppressors! Appoint for us a saviour; appoint for us a helper—all by Your grace.”
4|76|Believers fight for the cause of God, whereas disbelievers fight for the cause of the Devil. So fight against Satan’s ˹evil˺ forces. Indeed, Satan’s schemes are ever weak
4|77|Have you ˹O Prophet˺ not seen those who had been told, “Do not fight! Rather, establish prayer and pay alms-tax.”? Then once the order came to fight, a group of them feared those ˹hostile˺ people as God should be feared—or even more. They said, “Our Lord! Why have You ordered us to fight? If only You had delayed ˹the order for˺ us for a little while!” Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “The enjoyment of this world is so little, whereas the Hereafter is far better for those mindful ˹of God˺. And none of you will be wronged ˹even by the width of˺ the thread of a date stone
4|78|Wherever you may be, death will overcome you—even if you were in fortified towers.” When something good befalls them, they say, “This is from God,” but when something evil befalls them, they say, “This is from you.” Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Both have been destined by God.” So what is the matter with these people? They can hardly comprehend anything
4|79|Whatever good befalls you is from God and whatever evil befalls you is from yourself. We have sent you ˹O Prophet˺ as a messenger to ˹all˺ people. And God is sufficient as a Witness
4|80|Whoever obeys the Messenger has truly obeyed God. But whoever turns away, then ˹know that˺ We have not sent you ˹O Prophet˺ as a keeper over them
4|81|And they say, “We obey,” but when they leave you, a group of them would spend the night contradicting what they said. God records all their schemes. So turn away from them, and put your trust in God. And God is sufficient as a Trustee of Affairs
4|82|Do they not then reflect on the Quran? Had it been from anyone other than God, they would have certainly found in it many inconsistencies
4|83|And when they hear news of security or fear, they publicize it. Had they referred it to the Messenger or their authorities, those with sound judgment among them would have validated it. Had it not been for God’s grace and mercy, you would have followed Satan—except for a few
4|84|So fight in the cause of God ˹O Prophet˺. You are accountable for none but yourself. And motivate the believers ˹to fight˺, so perhaps God will curb the disbelievers’ might. And God is far superior in might and in punishment
4|85|Whoever intercedes for a good cause will have a share in the reward, and whoever intercedes for an evil cause will have a share in the burden. And God is Watchful over all things
4|86|And when you are greeted, respond with a better greeting or at least similarly. Surely God is a ˹vigilant˺ Reckoner of all things
4|87|God, there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him. He will certainly gather ˹all of˺ you together on the Day of Judgment—about which there is no doubt. And whose word is more truthful than God’s
4|88|Why are you ˹believers˺ divided into two groups regarding the hypocrites while God allowed them to regress ˹to disbelief˺ because of their misdeeds? Do you wish to guide those left by God to stray? And whoever God leaves to stray, you will never find for them a way
4|89|They wish you would disbelieve as they have disbelieved, so you may all be alike. So do not take them as allies unless they emigrate in the cause of God. But if they turn away, then seize them and kill them wherever you find them, and do not take any of them as allies or helpers
4|90|except those who are allies of a people you are bound with in a treaty or those wholeheartedly opposed to fighting either you or their own people. If God had willed, He would have empowered them to fight you. So if they refrain from fighting you and offer you peace, then God does not permit you to harm them
4|91|You will find others who wish to be safe from you and their own people. Yet they cannot resist the temptation ˹of disbelief or hostility˺. If they do not keep away, offer you peace, or refrain from attacking you, then seize them and kill them wherever you find them. We have given you full permission over such people
4|92|It is not lawful for a believer to kill another except by mistake. And whoever kills a believer unintentionally must free a believing slave and pay blood-money to the victim’s family—unless they waive it charitably. But if the victim is a believer from a hostile people, then a believing slave must be freed. And if the victim is from a people bound with you in a treaty, then blood-money must be paid to the family along with freeing a believing slave. Those who are unable, let them fast two consecutive months—as a means of repentance to God. And God is All-Knowing, All-Wise
4|93|And whoever kills a believer intentionally, their reward will be Hell—where they will stay indefinitely. God will be displeased with them, condemn them, and will prepare for them a tremendous punishment
4|94|O believers! When you struggle in the cause of God, be sure of who you fight. And do not say to those who offer you ˹greetings of˺ peace, “You are no believer!”—seeking a fleeting worldly gain. Instead, God has infinite bounties ˹in store˺. You were initially like them then God blessed you ˹with Islam˺. So be sure! Indeed, God is All-Aware of what you do
4|95|Those who stay at home—except those with valid excuses—are not equal to those who strive in the cause of God with their wealth and their lives. God has elevated in rank those who strive with their wealth and their lives above those who stay behind ˹with valid excuses˺. God has promised each a fine reward, but those who strive will receive a far better reward than others—
4|96|far superior ranks, forgiveness, and mercy from Him. And God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
4|97|When the angels seize the souls of those who have wronged themselves—scolding them, “What do you think you were doing?” they will reply, “We were oppressed in the land.” The angels will respond, “Was God’s earth not spacious enough for you to emigrate?” It is they who will have Hell as their home—what an evil destination
4|98|Except helpless men, women, and children who cannot afford a way out—
4|99|it is right to hope that God will pardon them. For God is Ever-Pardoning, All-Forgiving
4|100|Whoever emigrates in the cause of God will find many safe havens and bountiful resources throughout the earth. Those who leave their homes and die while emigrating to God and His Messenger—their reward has already been secured with God. And God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
4|101|When you travel through the land, it is permissible for you to shorten the prayer—˹especially˺ if you fear an attack by the disbelievers. Indeed, the disbelievers are your sworn enemies
4|102|When you ˹O Prophet˺ are ˹campaigning˺ with them and you lead them in prayer, let one group of them pray with you—while armed. When they prostrate themselves, let the other group stand guard behind them. Then the group that has not yet prayed will then join you in prayer—and let them be vigilant and armed. The disbelievers would wish to see you neglect your weapons and belongings, so they could launch a sweeping assault on you. But there is no blame if you lay aside your weapons when overcome by heavy rain or illness—but take precaution. Indeed, God has prepared a humiliating punishment for the disbelievers
4|103|When the prayers are over, remember God—whether you are standing, sitting, or lying down. But when you are secure, establish regular prayers. Indeed, performing prayers is a duty on the believers at the appointed times
4|104|Do not falter in pursuit of the enemy—if you are suffering, they too are suffering. But you can hope to receive from God what they can never hope for. And God is All-Knowing, All-Wise
4|105|Indeed, We have sent down the Book to you ˹O Prophet˺ in truth to judge between people by means of what God has shown you. So do not be an advocate for the deceitful
4|106|And seek God’s forgiveness—indeed, God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
4|107|Do not advocate for those who wrong themselves. Surely God does not like those who are deceitful, sinful
4|108|They try to hide ˹their deception˺ from people, but they can never hide it from God—in Whose presence they plot by night what is displeasing to Him. And God is Fully Aware of what they do
4|109|Here you are! You ˹believers˺ are advocating for them in this life, but who will ˹dare to˺ advocate for them before God on the Day of Judgment? Or who will come to their defence
4|110|Whoever commits evil or wrongs themselves then seeks God’s forgiveness will certainly find God All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
4|111|And whoever commits a sin—it is only to their own loss. God is All-Knowing, All-Wise
4|112|And whoever commits an evil or sinful deed then blames it on an innocent person, they will definitely bear the guilt of slander and blatant sin
4|113|Had it not been for God’s grace and mercy, a group of them would have sought to deceive you ˹O Prophet˺. Yet they would deceive none but themselves, nor can they harm you in the least. God has revealed to you the Book and wisdom and taught you what you never knew. Great ˹indeed˺ is God’s favour upon you
4|114|There is no good in most of their secret talks—except those encouraging charity, kindness, or reconciliation between people. And whoever does this seeking God’s pleasure, We will grant them a great reward
4|115|And whoever defies the Messenger after guidance has become clear to them and follows a path other than that of the believers, We will let them pursue what they have chosen, then burn them in Hell—what an evil end
4|116|Surely God does not forgive associating ˹others˺ with Him ˹in worship˺, but forgives anything else of whoever He wills. Indeed, whoever associates ˹others˺ with God has clearly gone far astray
4|117|Instead of God, they only invoke female gods and they ˹actually˺ invoke none but a rebellious Satan—
4|118|cursed by God—who said, “I will surely take hold of a certain number of Your servants
4|119|I will certainly mislead them and delude them with empty hopes. Also, I will order them and they will slit the ears of cattle and alter God’s creation.” And whoever takes Satan as a guardian instead of God has certainly suffered a tremendous loss
4|120|Satan only makes them ˹false˺ promises and deludes them with ˹empty˺ hopes. Truly Satan promises them nothing but delusion
4|121|It is they who will have Hell as their home, and they will find no escape from it
4|122|And those who believe and do good, We will soon admit them into Gardens under which rivers flow, to stay there for ever and ever. God’s promise is ˹always˺ true. And whose word is more truthful than God’s
4|123|˹Divine grace is˺ neither by your wishes nor those of the People of the Book! Whoever commits evil will be rewarded accordingly, and they will find no protector or helper besides God
4|124|But those who do good—whether male or female—and have faith will enter Paradise and will never be wronged ˹even as much as˺ the speck on a date stone
4|125|And who is better in faith than those who ˹fully˺ submit themselves to God, do good, and follow the Way of Abraham, the upright? God chose Abraham as a close friend
4|126|To God ˹alone˺ belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. And God is Fully Aware of everything
4|127|They ask you ˹O Prophet˺ regarding women. Say, “It is God Who instructs you regarding them. Instruction has ˹already˺ been revealed in the Book concerning the orphan women you deprive of their due rights but still wish to marry, also helpless children, as well as standing up for orphans’ rights. And whatever good you do is certainly well known to God.”
4|128|If a woman fears indifference or neglect from her husband, there is no blame on either of them if they seek ˹fair˺ settlement, which is best. Humans are ever inclined to selfishness. But if you are gracious and mindful ˹of God˺, surely God is All-Aware of what you do
4|129|You will never be able to maintain ˹emotional˺ justice between your wives—no matter how keen you are. So do not totally incline towards one leaving the other in suspense. And if you do what is right and are mindful ˹of God˺, surely God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
4|130|But if they choose to separate, God will enrich both of them from His bounties. And God is Ever-Bountiful, All-Wise
4|131|To God ˹alone˺ belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. Indeed, We have commanded those given the Scripture before you, as well as you, to be mindful of God. But if you disobey, then ˹know that˺ to God belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth. And God is Self-Sufficient, Praiseworthy
4|132|To God ˹alone˺ belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. And God is sufficient as a Trustee of Affairs
4|133|If it is His Will, He can remove you altogether, O humanity, and replace you with others. And God is Most Capable to do so
4|134|Whoever desires the reward of this world, then ˹let them know that˺ with God are the rewards of this world and the Hereafter. And God is All-Hearing, All-Seeing
4|135|O believers! Stand firm for justice as witnesses for God even if it is against yourselves, your parents, or close relatives. Be they rich or poor, God is best to ensure their interests. So do not let your desires cause you to deviate ˹from justice˺. If you distort the testimony or refuse to give it, then ˹know that˺ God is certainly All-Aware of what you do
4|136|O believers! Have faith in God, His Messenger, the Book He has revealed to His Messenger, and the Scriptures He revealed before. Indeed, whoever denies God, His angels, His Books, His messengers, and the Last Day has clearly gone far astray
4|137|Indeed, those who believed then disbelieved, then believed and again disbelieved—˹only˺ increasing in disbelief—God will neither forgive them nor guide them to the ˹Right˺ Way
4|138|Give good news of a painful punishment to hypocrites
4|139|who choose disbelievers as allies instead of the believers. Do they seek honour and power through that company? Surely all honour and power belongs to God
4|140|He has already revealed to you in the Book that when you hear God’s revelations being denied or ridiculed, then do not sit in that company unless they engage in a different topic, or else you will be like them. Surely God will gather the hypocrites and disbelievers all together in Hell
4|141|˹The hypocrites are˺ those who wait to see what happens to you. So if God grants you victory, they say ˹to you˺, “Were we not on your side?” But if the disbelievers have a share ˹of victory˺, they say ˹to them˺, “Did we not have the advantage over you, yet we protected you from the believers?” God will judge between ˹all of˺ you on the Day of Judgment. And God will never grant the disbelievers a way over the believers
4|142|Surely the hypocrites seek to deceive God, but He outwits them. When they stand up for prayer, they do it half-heartedly only to be seen by people—hardly remembering God at all
4|143|Torn between belief and disbelief—belonging neither to these ˹believers˺ nor those ˹disbelievers˺. And whoever God leaves to stray, you will never find for them a way
4|144|O believers! Do not take disbelievers as allies instead of the believers. Would you like to give God solid proof against yourselves
4|145|Surely the hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of the Fire—and you will never find for them any helper—
4|146|except those who repent, mend their ways, hold fast to God, and are sincere in their devotion to God; they will be with the believers. And God will grant the believers a great reward
4|147|Why should God punish you if you are grateful and faithful? God is ever Appreciative, All-Knowing
4|148|God does not like negative thoughts to be voiced—except by those who have been wronged. God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing
4|149|Whether you reveal or conceal a good or pardon an evil—surely God is Ever-Pardoning, Most Capable
4|150|Surely those who deny God and His messengers and wish to make a distinction between God and His messengers, saying, “We believe in some and disbelieve in others,” desiring to forge a compromise
4|151|they are indeed the true disbelievers. And We have prepared for the disbelievers a humiliating punishment
4|152|As for those who believe in God and His messengers—accepting all; rejecting none—He will surely give them their rewards. And God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
4|153|The People of the Book demand that you ˹O Prophet˺ bring down for them a revelation in writing from heaven. They demanded what is even greater than this from Moses, saying, “Make God visible to us!” So a thunderbolt struck them for their wrongdoing. Then they took the calf for worship after receiving clear signs. Still We forgave them for that ˹after their repentance˺ and gave Moses compelling proof
4|154|We raised the Mount over them ˹as a warning˺ for ˹breaking˺ their covenant and said, “Enter the gate ˹of Jerusalem˺ with humility.” We also warned them, “Do not break the Sabbath,” and took from them a firm covenant
4|155|˹They were condemned˺ for breaking their covenant, rejecting God’s signs, killing the prophets unjustly, and for saying, “Our hearts are unreceptive!”—it is God Who has sealed their hearts for their disbelief, so they do not believe except for a few—
4|156|and for their denial and outrageous accusation against Mary
4|157|and for boasting, “We killed the Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, the messenger of God.” But they neither killed nor crucified him—it was only made to appear so. Even those who argue for this ˹crucifixion˺ are in doubt. They have no knowledge whatsoever—only making assumptions. They certainly did not kill him
4|158|Rather, God raised him up to Himself. And God is Almighty, All-Wise
4|159|Every one of the People of the Book will definitely believe in him before his death. And on the Day of Judgment Jesus will be a witness against them
4|160|We forbade the Jews certain foods that had been lawful to them for their wrongdoing, and for hindering many from the Way of God
4|161|taking interest despite its prohibition, and consuming people’s wealth unjustly. We have prepared for the disbelievers among them a painful punishment
4|162|But those of them well-grounded in knowledge, the faithful ˹who˺ believe in what has been revealed to you ˹O Prophet˺ and what was revealed before you—˹especially˺ those who establish prayer—and those who pay alms-tax and believe in God and the Last Day, to these ˹people˺ We will grant a great reward
4|163|Indeed, We have sent revelation to you ˹O Prophet˺ as We sent revelation to Noah and the prophets after him. We also sent revelation to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and his descendants, ˹as well as˺ Jesus, Job, Jonah, Aaron, and Solomon. And to David We gave the Psalms
4|164|There are messengers whose stories We have told you already and others We have not. And to Moses God spoke directly
4|165|˹All were˺ messengers delivering good news and warnings so humanity should have no excuse before God after ˹the coming of˺ the messengers. And God is Almighty, All-Wise
4|166|Yet ˹if you are denied, O Prophet,˺ God bears witness to what He has sent down to you—He has sent it with His knowledge. The angels too bear witness. And God ˹alone˺ is sufficient as a Witness
4|167|Those who disbelieve and hinder ˹others˺ from the Way of God have certainly strayed far away
4|168|Those who disbelieve and wrong themselves—surely God will neither forgive them nor guide them to any path
4|169|except that of Hell, to stay there for ever and ever. And that is easy for God
4|170|O humanity! The Messenger has certainly come to you with the truth from your Lord, so believe for your own good. But if you disbelieve, then ˹know that˺ to God belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth. And God is All-Knowing, All-Wise
4|171|O People of the Book! Do not go to extremes regarding your faith; say nothing about God except the truth. The Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, was no more than a messenger of God and the fulfilment of His Word through Mary and a spirit ˹created by a command˺ from Him. So believe in God and His messengers and do not say, “Trinity.” Stop!—for your own good. God is only One God. Glory be to Him! He is far above having a son! To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. And God is sufficient as a Trustee of Affairs
4|172|The Messiah would never be too proud to be a servant of God, nor would the angels nearest to God. Those who are too proud and arrogant to worship Him will be brought before Him all together
4|173|As for those who believe and do good, He will reward them in full and increase them out of His grace. But those who are too proud and arrogant, He will subject them to a painful punishment. And besides God they will find no protector or helper
4|174|O humanity! There has come to you conclusive evidence from your Lord. And We have sent down to you a brilliant light
4|175|As for those who believe in God and hold fast to Him, He will admit them into His mercy and grace and guide them to Himself through the Straight Path
4|176|They ask you ˹for a ruling, O Prophet˺. Say, “God gives you a ruling regarding those who die without children or parents.” If a man dies childless and leaves behind a sister, she will inherit one-half of his estate, whereas her brother will inherit all of her estate if she dies childless. If this person leaves behind two sisters, they together will inherit two-thirds of the estate. But if the deceased leaves male and female siblings, a male’s share will be equal to that of two females. God makes ˹this˺ clear to you so you do not go astray. And God has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all things
5|1|O believers! Honour your obligations. All grazing livestock has been made lawful to you—except what is hereby announced to you and hunting while on pilgrimage. Indeed, God commands what He wills
5|2|O believers! Do not violate God’s rituals ˹of pilgrimage˺, the sacred months, the sacrificial animals, the ˹offerings decorated with˺ garlands, nor those ˹pilgrims˺ on their way to the Sacred House seeking their Lord’s bounty and pleasure. When pilgrimage has ended, you are allowed to hunt. Do not let the hatred of a people who once barred you from the Sacred Mosque provoke you to transgress. Cooperate with one another in goodness and righteousness, and do not cooperate in sin and transgression. And be mindful of God. Surely God is severe in punishment
5|3|Forbidden to you are carrion, blood, and swine; what is slaughtered in the name of any other than God; what is killed by strangling, beating, a fall, or by being gored to death; what is partly eaten by a predator unless you slaughter it; and what is sacrificed on altars. You are also forbidden to draw lots for decisions. This is all evil. Today the disbelievers have given up all hope of ˹undermining˺ your faith. So do not fear them; fear Me! Today I have perfected your faith for you, completed My favour upon you, and chosen Islam as your way. But whoever is compelled by extreme hunger—not intending to sin—then surely God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
5|4|They ask you, ˹O Prophet,˺ what is permissible for them ˹to eat˺. Say, “What is good and lawful. Also what is caught by your hunting animals and birds of prey which you have trained as instructed by God. So eat what they catch for you, but mention the Name of God over it ˹first˺.” And be mindful of God. Surely God is swift in reckoning
5|5|Today all good, pure foods have been made lawful for you. Similarly, the food of the People of the Book is permissible for you and yours is permissible for them. And ˹permissible for you in marriage˺ are chaste believing women as well as chaste women of those given the Scripture before you—as long as you pay them their dowries in wedlock, neither fornicating nor taking them as mistresses. And whoever rejects the faith, all their good deeds will be void ˹in this life˺ and in the Hereafter they will be among the losers
5|6|O believers! When you rise up for prayer, wash your faces and your hands up to the elbows, wipe your heads, and wash your feet to the ankles. And if you are in a state of ˹full˺ impurity, then take a full bath. But if you are ill, on a journey, or have relieved yourselves, or have been intimate with your wives and cannot find water, then purify yourselves with clean earth by wiping your faces and hands. It is not God’s Will to burden you, but to purify you and complete His favour upon you, so perhaps you will be grateful
5|7|Remember God’s favour upon you and the covenant He made with you when you said, “We hear and obey.” And be mindful of God. Surely God knows best what is ˹hidden˺ in the heart
5|8|O believers! Stand firm for God and bear true testimony. Do not let the hatred of a people lead you to injustice. Be just! That is closer to righteousness. And be mindful of God. Surely God is All-Aware of what you do
5|9|God has promised those who believe and do good ˹His˺ forgiveness and a great reward
5|10|As for those who disbelieve and deny Our signs, they are the residents of the Hellfire
5|11|O believers! Remember God’s favour upon you: when a people sought to harm you, but He held their hands back from you. Be mindful of God. And in God let the believers put their trust
5|12|God made a covenant with the Children of Israel and appointed twelve leaders from among them and ˹then˺ said, “I am truly with you. If you establish prayer, pay alms-tax, believe in My messengers, support them, and lend to God a good loan, I will certainly forgive your sins and admit you into Gardens under which rivers flow. And whoever among you disbelieves afterwards has truly strayed from the Right Way.”
5|13|But for breaking their covenant We condemned them and hardened their hearts. They distorted the words of the Scripture and neglected a portion of what they had been commanded to uphold. You ˹O Prophet˺ will always find deceit on their part, except for a few. But pardon them and bear with them. Indeed, God loves the good-doers
5|14|And from those who say, “We are Christians,” We took their covenant, but they neglected a portion of what they had been commanded to uphold. So We let hostility and enmity arise between them until the Day of Judgment, and soon God will inform them of all they have done
5|15|O People of the Book! Now Our Messenger has come to you, revealing much of what you have hidden of the Scriptures and disregarding much. There certainly has come to you from God a light and a clear Book
5|16|through which God guides those who seek His pleasure to the ways of peace, brings them out of darkness and into light by His Will, and guides them to the Straight Path
5|17|Indeed, those who say, “God is the Messiah, son of Mary,” have fallen into disbelief. Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Who has the power to prevent God if He chose to destroy the Messiah, son of Mary, his mother, and everyone in the world all together?” To God ˹alone˺ belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and everything in between. He creates whatever He wills. And God is Most Capable of everything
5|18|The Jews and the Christians each say, “We are the children of God and His most beloved!” Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Why then does He punish you for your sins? No! You are only humans like others of His Own making. He forgives whoever He wills and punishes whoever He wills. To God ˹alone˺ belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and everything in between. And to Him is the final return.”
5|19|O People of the Book! Our Messenger has indeed come to you, making things clear to you after an interval between the messengers so you do not say, “There has never come to us a deliverer of good news or a warner.” Now there has come to you a deliverer of good news and a warner. And God is Most Capable of everything
5|20|And ˹remember˺ when Moses said to his people, “O my people! Remember God’s favours upon you when He raised prophets from among you, made you sovereign, and gave you what He had never given anyone in the world
5|21|O my people! Enter the Holy Land which God has destined for you ˹to enter˺. And do not turn back or else you will become losers.”
5|22|They replied, “O Moses! There is an enormously powerful people there, so we will never ˹be able to˺ enter it until they leave. If they do, then we will enter!”
5|23|Two God-fearing men—who had been blessed by God—said, “Surprise them through the gate. If you do, you will certainly prevail. Put your trust in God if you are ˹truly˺ believers.”
5|24|˹Yet˺ they said, “O Moses! ˹Still˺ we will never enter as long as they remain there. So go—both you and your Lord—and fight; we are staying right here!”
5|25|Moses pleaded, “My Lord! I have no control over anyone except myself and my brother. So set us apart from the rebellious people.”
5|26|God replied, “Then this land is forbidden to them for forty years, during which they will wander through the land. So do not grieve for the rebellious people.”
5|27|Relate to them in truth ˹O Prophet˺ the story of Adam’s two sons—how each offered a sacrifice: Abel’s offering was accepted while Cain’s was not. So Cain threatened, “I will kill you!” His brother replied, “God only accepts ˹the offering˺ of the sincerely devout
5|28|If you raise your hand to kill me, I will not raise mine to kill you, because I fear God—the Lord of all worlds
5|29|I want to let you bear your sin against me along with your other sins, then you will be one of those destined to the Fire. And that is the reward of the wrongdoers.”
5|30|Yet Cain convinced himself to kill his brother, so he killed him—becoming a loser
5|31|Then God sent a crow digging ˹a grave˺ in the ground ˹for a dead crow˺, in order to show him how to bury the corpse of his brother. He cried, “Alas! Have I ˹even˺ failed to be like this crow and bury the corpse of my brother?” So he became regretful
5|32|That is why We ordained for the Children of Israel that whoever takes a life—unless as a punishment for murder or mischief in the land—it will be as if they killed all of humanity; and whoever saves a life, it will be as if they saved all of humanity. ˹Although˺ Our messengers already came to them with clear proofs, many of them still transgressed afterwards through the land
5|33|Indeed, the penalty for those who wage war against God and His Messenger and spread mischief in the land is death, crucifixion, cutting off their hands and feet on opposite sides, or exile from the land. This ˹penalty˺ is a disgrace for them in this world, and they will suffer a tremendous punishment in the Hereafter
5|34|As for those who repent before you seize them, then know that God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
5|35|O believers! Be mindful of God and seek what brings you closer to Him and struggle in His Way, so you may be successful
5|36|As for the disbelievers, even if they were to possess everything in the world twice over ˹and offer it all˺ to ransom themselves from the punishment of the Day of Judgment, it would never be accepted from them. And they will suffer a painful punishment
5|37|They will be desperate to get out of the Fire but they will never be able to. And they will suffer an everlasting punishment
5|38|As for male and female thieves, cut off their hands for what they have done—a deterrent from God. And God is Almighty, All-Wise
5|39|But whoever repents after their wrongdoing and mends their ways, God will surely turn to them in forgiveness. Indeed, God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
5|40|Do you not know that the kingdom of the heavens and the earth belongs to God ˹alone˺? He punishes whoever He wills and forgives whoever He wills. And God is Most Capable of everything
5|41|O Messenger! Do not grieve for those who race to disbelieve—those who say, “We believe” with their tongues, but their hearts are in disbelief. Nor those among the Jews who eagerly listen to lies, attentive to those who are too arrogant to come to you. They distort the Scripture, taking rulings out of context, then say, “If this is the ruling you get ˹from Muḥammad˺, accept it. If not, beware!” Whoever God allows to be deluded, you can never be of any help to them against God. It is not God’s Will to purify their hearts. For them is disgrace in this world, and they will suffer a tremendous punishment in the Hereafter
5|42|They eagerly listen to falsehood and consume forbidden gain. So if they come to you ˹O Prophet˺, either judge between them or turn away from them. If you turn away from them, they cannot harm you whatsoever. But if you judge between them, then do so with justice. Surely God loves those who are just
5|43|But why do they come to you for judgment when they ˹already˺ have the Torah containing God’s judgment, then they turn away after all? They are not ˹true˺ believers
5|44|Indeed, We revealed the Torah, containing guidance and light, by which the prophets, who submitted themselves to God, made judgments for Jews. So too did the rabbis and scholars judge according to God’s Book, with which they were entrusted and of which they were made keepers. So do not fear the people; fear Me! Nor trade my revelations for a fleeting gain. And those who do not judge by what God has revealed are ˹truly˺ the disbelievers
5|45|We ordained for them in the Torah, “A life for a life, an eye for an eye, a nose for a nose, an ear for an ear, a tooth for a tooth—and for wounds equal retaliation.” But whoever waives it charitably, it will be atonement for them. And those who do not judge by what God has revealed are ˹truly˺ the wrongdoers
5|46|Then in the footsteps of the prophets, We sent Jesus, son of Mary, confirming the Torah revealed before him. And We gave him the Gospel containing guidance and light and confirming what was revealed in the Torah—a guide and a lesson to the God-fearing
5|47|So let the people of the Gospel judge by what God has revealed in it. And those who do not judge by what God has revealed are ˹truly˺ the rebellious
5|48|We have revealed to you ˹O Prophet˺ this Book with the truth, as a confirmation of previous Scriptures and a supreme authority on them. So judge between them by what God has revealed, and do not follow their desires over the truth that has come to you. To each of you We have ordained a code of law and a way of life. If God had willed, He would have made you one community, but His Will is to test you with what He has given ˹each of˺ you. So compete with one another in doing good. To God you will all return, then He will inform you ˹of the truth˺ regarding your differences
5|49|And judge between them ˹O Prophet˺ by what God has revealed, and do not follow their desires. And beware, so they do not lure you away from some of what God has revealed to you. If they turn away ˹from God’s judgment˺, then know that it is God’s Will to repay them for some of their sins, and that many people are indeed rebellious
5|50|Is it the judgment of ˹pre-Islamic˺ ignorance they seek? Who could be a better judge than God for people of sure faith
5|51|O believers! Take neither Jews nor Christians as guardians—they are guardians of each other. Whoever does so will be counted as one of them. Surely God does not guide the wrongdoing people
5|52|You see those with sickness in their hearts racing for their guardianship, saying ˹in justification˺, “We fear a turn of fortune will strike us.” But perhaps God will bring about ˹your˺ victory or another favour by His command, and they will regret what they have hidden in their hearts
5|53|˹Only then,˺ the believers will ask ˹one another˺, “Are these the ones who swore solemn oaths by God that they were with you?” Their deeds have been in vain, so they have become losers
5|54|O believers! Whoever among you abandons their faith, God will replace them with others who love Him and are loved by Him. They will be humble with the believers but firm towards the disbelievers, struggling in the Way of God; fearing no blame from anyone. This is the favour of God. He grants it to whoever He wills. And God is All-Bountiful, All-Knowing
5|55|Your only guardians are God, His Messenger, and fellow believers—who establish prayer and pay alms-tax with humility
5|56|Whoever allies themselves with God, His Messenger, and fellow believers, then it is certainly God’s party that will prevail
5|57|O believers! Do not seek the guardianship of those given the Scripture before you and the disbelievers who have made your faith a mockery and amusement. And be mindful of God if you are ˹truly˺ believers
5|58|When you call to prayer, they mock it in amusement. This is because they are a people without understanding
5|59|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “O People of the Book! Do you resent us only because we believe in God and what has been revealed to us and what was revealed before—while most of you are rebellious?”
5|60|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Shall I inform you of those who deserve a worse punishment from God ˹than the rebellious˺? It is those who earned God’s condemnation and displeasure—some being reduced to apes and pigs and worshippers of false gods. These are far worse in rank and farther astray from the Right Way.”
5|61|When they come to you ˹believers˺ they say, “We believe.” But they are committed to disbelief when they enter and when they leave. And God knows what they hide
5|62|You see many of them racing towards sin, transgression, and consumption of forbidden gain. Evil indeed are their actions
5|63|Why do their rabbis and scholars not forbid them from saying what is sinful and consuming what is unlawful? Evil indeed is their inaction
5|64|˹Some among˺ the Jews said, “God is tight-fisted.” May their fists be tied and they be condemned for what they said. Rather, He is open-handed, giving freely as He pleases. That which has been revealed to you ˹O Prophet˺ from your Lord will only cause many of them to increase in wickedness and disbelief. We have stirred among them hostility and hatred until the Day of Judgment. Whenever they kindle the fire of war, God puts it out. And they strive to spread corruption in the land. And God does not like corruptors
5|65|Had the People of the Book only been faithful and mindful ˹of God˺, We would have certainly absolved them of their sins and admitted them into the Gardens of Bliss
5|66|And had they observed the Torah, the Gospel, and what has been revealed to them from their Lord, they would have been overwhelmed with provisions from above and below. Some among them are upright, yet many do nothing but evil
5|67|O Messenger! Convey everything revealed to you from your Lord. If you do not, then you have not delivered His message. God will ˹certainly˺ protect you from the people. Indeed, God does not guide the people who disbelieve
5|68|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “O People of the Book! You have nothing to stand on unless you observe the Torah, the Gospel, and what has been revealed to you from your Lord.” And your Lord’s revelation to you ˹O Prophet˺ will only cause many of them to increase in wickedness and disbelief. So do not grieve for the people who disbelieve
5|69|Indeed, the believers, Jews, Sabians and Christians—whoever ˹truly˺ believes in God and the Last Day and does good, there will be no fear for them, nor will they grieve
5|70|Indeed, We took a covenant from the Children of Israel and sent them messengers. Whenever a messenger came to them with what they did not desire, they denied some and killed others
5|71|They thought there would be no consequences, so they turned a blind eye and a deaf ear. Yet God turned to them in forgiveness ˹after their repentance˺, but again many became blind and deaf. And God is All-Seeing of what they do
5|72|Those who say, “God is the Messiah, son of Mary,” have certainly fallen into disbelief. The Messiah ˹himself˺ said, “O Children of Israel! Worship God—my Lord and your Lord.” Whoever associates others with God ˹in worship˺ will surely be forbidden Paradise by God. Their home will be the Fire. And the wrongdoers will have no helpers
5|73|Those who say, “God is one in a Trinity,” have certainly fallen into disbelief. There is only One God. If they do not stop saying this, those who disbelieve among them will be afflicted with a painful punishment
5|74|Will they not turn to God in repentance and seek His forgiveness? And God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
5|75|The Messiah, son of Mary, was no more than a messenger. ˹Many˺ messengers had ˹come and˺ gone before him. His mother was a woman of truth. They both ate food. See how We make the signs clear to them, yet see how they are deluded ˹from the truth˺
5|76|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “How can you worship besides God those who can neither harm nor benefit you? And God ˹alone˺ is the All-Hearing, All-Knowing.”
5|77|Say, “O People of the Book! Do not go to extremes in your faith beyond the truth, nor follow the vain desires of those who went astray before ˹you˺. They misled many and strayed from the Right Way.”
5|78|The disbelievers among the Children of Israel were condemned in the revelations of David and Jesus, son of Mary. That was for their disobedience and violations
5|79|They did not forbid one another from doing evil. Evil indeed was what they did
5|80|You see many of them taking the disbelievers as allies. Truly wicked are their misdeeds, which have earned them God’s wrath. And they will be in everlasting torment
5|81|Had they believed in God, the Prophet, and what has been revealed to him, they would have never taken those ˹pagans˺ as allies. But most of them are rebellious
5|82|You will surely find the most bitter towards the believers to be the Jews and polytheists and the most gracious to be those who call themselves Christian. That is because there are priests and monks among them and because they are not arrogant
5|83|When they listen to what has been revealed to the Messenger, you see their eyes overflowing with tears for recognizing the truth. They say, “Our Lord! We believe, so count us among the witnesses
5|84|Why should we not believe in God and the truth that has come to us? And we long for our Lord to include us in the company of the righteous.”
5|85|So God will reward them for what they said with Gardens under which rivers flow, to stay there forever. And that is the reward of the good-doers
5|86|As for those who disbelieve and reject Our signs, they will be the residents of the Hellfire
5|87|O believers! Do not forbid the good things which God has made lawful for you, and do not transgress. Indeed, God does not like transgressors
5|88|Eat of the good, lawful things provided to you by God. And be mindful of God in Whom you believe
5|89|God will not call you to account for your thoughtless oaths, but He will hold you accountable for deliberate oaths. The penalty for a broken oath is to feed ten poor people from what you normally feed your own family, or to clothe them, or to free a bondsperson. But if none of this is affordable, then you must fast three days. This is the penalty for breaking your oaths. So be mindful of your oaths. This is how God makes things clear to you, so perhaps you will be grateful
5|90|O believers! Intoxicants, gambling, idols, and drawing lots for decisions are all evil of Satan’s handiwork. So shun them so you may be successful
5|91|Satan’s plan is to stir up hostility and hatred between you with intoxicants and gambling and to prevent you from remembering God and praying. Will you not then abstain
5|92|Obey God and obey the Messenger and beware! But if you turn away, then know that Our Messenger’s duty is only to deliver ˹the message˺ clearly
5|93|There is no blame on those who believe and do good for what they had consumed before ˹the prohibition˺, as long as they fear God, have faith, and do what is good; then they believe and act virtuously, then become fully mindful ˹of God˺ and do righteous deeds. For God loves the good-doers
5|94|O believers! God will surely test you with game within the reach of your hands and spears to distinguish those who fear Him in secret. Whoever transgresses from now on will suffer a painful punishment
5|95|O believers! Do not kill game while on pilgrimage. Whoever kills game intentionally must compensate by offering its equivalence—as judged by two just men among you—to be offered at the Sacred House, or by feeding the needy, or by fasting so that they may taste the consequences of their violations. God has forgiven what has been done. But those who persist will be punished by God. And God is Almighty, capable of punishment
5|96|It is lawful for you to hunt and eat seafood, as a provision for you and for travellers. But hunting on land is forbidden to you while on pilgrimage. Be mindful of God to Whom you all will be gathered
5|97|God has made the Ka’bah—the Sacred House—a sanctuary of well-being for all people, along with the sacred months, the sacrificial animals, and the ˹offerings decorated with˺ garlands. All this so you may know that God knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth, and that He has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of everything
5|98|Know that God is severe in punishment and that He is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
5|99|The Messenger’s duty is only to deliver ˹the message˺. And God ˹fully˺ knows what you reveal and what you conceal
5|100|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Good and evil are not equal, though you may be dazzled by the abundance of evil. So be mindful of God, O people of reason, so you may be successful.”
5|101|O believers! Do not ask about any matter which, if made clear to you, may disturb you. But if you inquire about what is being revealed in the Quran, it will be made clear to you. God has forgiven what was done ˹in the past˺. And God is All-Forgiving, Most Forbearing
5|102|Some people before you asked such questions then denied their answers
5|103|God has never ordained the ˹so-called˺ baḥîrah, sâ'ibah, waṣîlah, and ḥâm camels. But the disbelievers just fabricate lies about God, and most of them lack understanding
5|104|When it is said to them, “Come to God’s revelations and to the Messenger,” they reply, “What we found our forefathers practicing is good enough for us.” ˹Would they still do so,˺ even if their forefathers had absolutely no knowledge or guidance
5|105|O believers! You are accountable only for yourselves. It will not harm you if someone chooses to deviate—as long as you are ˹rightly˺ guided. To God you will all return, and He will inform you of what you used to do
5|106|O believers! When death approaches any of you, call upon two just Muslim men to witness as you make a bequest; otherwise, two non-Muslims if you are afflicted with death while on a journey. If you doubt ˹their testimony˺, keep them after prayer and let them testify under oath ˹saying˺, “By God! We would never sell our testimony for any price, even in favour of a close relative, nor withhold the testimony of God. Otherwise, we would surely be sinful.”
5|107|If they are found guilty ˹of false testimony˺, let the deceased’s two closest heirs affected by the bequest replace the witnesses and testify under oath ˹saying˺, “By God! Our testimony is truer than theirs. We have not transgressed. Otherwise, we would surely be wrongdoers.”
5|108|In this way it is more likely that witnesses will give true testimony or else fear that their oaths could be refuted by those of the heirs. Be mindful of God and obey. For God does not guide the rebellious people
5|109|˹Consider˺ the Day God will gather the messengers and say, “What response did you receive?” They will reply, “We have no knowledge ˹compared to You˺! You ˹alone˺ are indeed the Knower of all unseen.”
5|110|And ˹on Judgment Day˺ God will say, “O Jesus, son of Mary! Remember My favour upon you and your mother: how I supported you with the holy spirit so you spoke to people in ˹your˺ infancy and adulthood. How I taught you writing, wisdom, the Torah, and the Gospel. How you moulded a bird from clay—by My Will—and breathed into it and it became a ˹real˺ bird—by My Will. How you healed the blind and the lepers—by My Will. How you brought the dead to life—by My Will. How I prevented the Children of Israel from harming you when you came to them with clear proofs and the disbelievers among them said, “This is nothing but pure magic.”
5|111|And how I inspired the disciples, “Believe in Me and My messenger!” They declared, “We believe and bear witness that we fully submit ˹to God˺.”
5|112|˹Remember˺ when the disciples asked, “O Jesus, son of Mary! Would your Lord be willing to send down to us a table spread with food from heaven?” Jesus answered, “Fear God if you are ˹truly˺ believers.”
5|113|They said, “We ˹only˺ wish to eat from it to reassure our hearts, to verify you are indeed truthful to us, and to become its witnesses.”
5|114|Jesus, son of Mary, prayed, “O God, our Lord! Send us from heaven a table spread with food as a feast for us—the first and last of us—and as a sign from You. Provide for us! You are indeed the Best Provider.”
5|115|God answered, “I am sending it down to you. But whoever among you denies afterwards will be subjected to a torment I have never inflicted on anyone of My creation.”
5|116|And ˹on Judgment Day˺ God will say, “O Jesus, son of Mary! Did you ever ask the people to worship you and your mother as gods besides God?” He will answer, “Glory be to You! How could I ever say what I had no right to say? If I had said such a thing, you would have certainly known it. You know what is ˹hidden˺ within me, but I do not know what is within You. Indeed, You ˹alone˺ are the Knower of all unseen
5|117|I never told them anything except what You ordered me to say: “Worship God—my Lord and your Lord!” And I was witness over them as long as I remained among them. But when You took me, You were the Witness over them—and You are a Witness over all things
5|118|If You punish them, they belong to You after all. But if You forgive them, You are surely the Almighty, All-Wise.”
5|119|God will declare, “This is the Day when ˹only˺ the faithful will benefit from their faithfulness. Theirs are Gardens under which rivers flow, to stay there for ever and ever. God is pleased with them and they are pleased with Him. That is the ultimate triumph.”
5|120|To God ˹alone˺ belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and everything within. And He is Most Capable of everything
6|1|All praise is for God Who created the heavens and the earth and made darkness and light. Yet the disbelievers set up equals to their Lord ˹in worship˺
6|2|He is the One Who created you from clay, then appointed a term ˹for your death˺ and another known only to Him ˹for your resurrection˺—yet you continue to doubt
6|3|He is the Only True God in the heavens and the earth. He knows whatever you conceal and whatever you reveal, and knows whatever you do
6|4|Whenever a sign comes to them from their Lord, they turn away from it
6|5|They have indeed rejected the truth when it came to them, so they will soon face the consequences of their ridicule
6|6|Have they not seen how many ˹disbelieving˺ peoples We destroyed before them? We had made them more established in the land than you. We sent down abundant rain for them and made rivers flow at their feet. Then We destroyed them for their sins and replaced them with other peoples
6|7|Had We sent down to you ˹O Prophet˺ a revelation in writing and they were to touch it with their own hands, the disbelievers would still have said, “This is nothing but pure magic!”
6|8|They say, “Why has no ˹visible˺ angel come with him?” Had We sent down an angel, the matter would have certainly been settled ˹at once˺, and they would have never been given more time ˹to repent˺
6|9|And if We had sent an angel, We would have certainly made it ˹assume the form of˺ a man—leaving them more confused than they already are
6|10|˹Other˺ messengers had already been ridiculed before you ˹O Prophet˺, but those who mocked them were overtaken by what they used to ridicule
6|11|Say, “Travel throughout the land and see the fate of the deniers.”
6|12|Ask ˹them, O Prophet˺, “To whom belongs everything in the heavens and the earth?” Say, “To God!” He has taken upon Himself to be Merciful. He will certainly gather ˹all of˺ you together for the Day of Judgment—about which there is no doubt. But those who have ruined themselves will never believe
6|13|To Him belongs whatever exists in the day and night. And He is the All-Hearing, All-Knowing
6|14|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Will I take any guardian other than God, the Originator of the heavens and the earth, Who provides for all and is not in need of provision?” Say, “I have been commanded to be the first to submit and not be one of the polytheists.”
6|15|Say, “I truly fear—if I were to disobey my Lord—the torment of a tremendous Day.”
6|16|Whoever is spared the torment of that Day will have certainly been shown God’s mercy. And that is the absolute triumph
6|17|If God touches you with harm, none can undo it except Him. And if He touches you with a blessing, He is Most Capable of everything
6|18|He reigns supreme over His creation. And He is the All-Wise, All-Aware
6|19|Ask ˹them, O Prophet˺, “Who is the best witness?” Say, “God is! He is a Witness between me and you. And this Quran has been revealed to me so that, with it, I may warn you and whoever it reaches. Do you ˹pagans˺ testify that there are other gods besides God?” ˹Then˺ say, “I will never testify ˹to this˺!” ˹And˺ say, “There is only One God. And I totally reject whatever ˹idols˺ you associate with Him.”
6|20|Those to whom We gave the Scripture recognize him ˹to be a true prophet˺ as they recognize their own children. Those who have ruined themselves will never believe
6|21|Who does more wrong than those who fabricate lies against God or deny His signs? Indeed, the wrongdoers will never succeed
6|22|˹Consider˺ the Day We will gather them all together then ask those who associated others ˹with God in worship˺, “Where are those gods you used to claim?”
6|23|Their only argument will be: “By God, our Lord! We were never polytheists.”
6|24|See how they will lie about themselves and how those ˹gods˺ they fabricated will fail them
6|25|There are some of them who ˹pretend to˺ listen to your recitation ˹of the Quran˺, but We have cast veils over their hearts—leaving them unable to comprehend it—and deafness in their ears. Even if they were to see every sign, they still would not believe in them. The disbelievers would ˹even˺ come to argue with you, saying, “This ˹Quran˺ is nothing but ancient fables!”
6|26|They turn others away from the Prophet and distance themselves as well. They ruin none but themselves, yet they fail to perceive it
6|27|If only you could see when they will be detained before the Fire! They will cry, “Oh! If only we could be sent back, we would never deny the signs of our Lord and we would ˹surely˺ be of the believers.”
6|28|But no! ˹They only say this˺ because the truth they used to hide will become all too clear to them. Even if they were to be sent back, they would certainly revert to what they were forbidden. Indeed they are liars
6|29|They insisted, “There is nothing beyond this worldly life and we will never be resurrected.”
6|30|But if only you could see when they will be detained before their Lord! He will ask ˹them˺, “Is this ˹Hereafter˺ not the truth?” They will cry, “Absolutely, by our Lord!” He will say, “Then taste the punishment for your disbelief.”
6|31|Losers indeed are those who deny the meeting with God until the Hour takes them by surprise, then they will cry, “Woe to us for having ignored this!” They will bear ˹the burden of˺ their sins on their backs. Evil indeed is their burden
6|32|This worldly life is no more than play and amusement, but far better is the ˹eternal˺ Home of the Hereafter for those mindful ˹of God˺. Will you not then understand
6|33|We certainly know that what they say grieves you ˹O Prophet˺. It is not your honesty they question—it is God’s signs that the wrongdoers deny
6|34|Indeed, messengers before you were rejected but patiently endured rejection and persecution until Our help came to them. And God’s promise ˹to help˺ is never broken. And you have already received some of the narratives of these messengers
6|35|If you find their denial unbearable, then build—if you can—a tunnel through the earth or stairs to the sky to bring them a ˹more compelling˺ sign. Had God so willed, He could have guided them all. So do not be one of those ignorant ˹of this fact˺
6|36|Only the attentive will respond ˹to your call˺. As for the dead, God will raise them up, then to Him they will ˹all˺ be returned
6|37|They ask, “Why has no ˹other˺ sign been sent down to him from his Lord?” Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “God certainly has the power to send down a sign”—though most of them do not know
6|38|All living beings roaming the earth and winged birds soaring in the sky are communities like yourselves. We have left nothing out of the Record. Then to their Lord they will be gathered all together
6|39|Those who deny Our signs are ˹wilfully˺ deaf and dumb—lost in darkness. God leaves whoever He wills to stray and guides whoever He wills to the Straight Way
6|40|Ask ˹them, O Prophet˺, “Imagine if you were overwhelmed by God’s torment or the Hour—would you call upon any other than God ˹for help˺? ˹Answer me˺ if your claims are true
6|41|No! He is the only One you would call. And if He willed, He could remove the affliction that made you invoke Him. Only then will you forget whatever you associate with Him ˹in worship˺.”
6|42|Indeed, We have sent messengers before you ˹O Prophet˺ to other people who We put through suffering and adversity ˹for their denial˺, so perhaps they would be humbled
6|43|Why did they not humble themselves when We made them suffer? Instead, their hearts were hardened, and Satan made their misdeeds appealing to them
6|44|When they became oblivious to warnings, We showered them with everything they desired. But just as they became prideful of what they were given, We seized them by surprise, then they instantly fell into despair
6|45|So the wrongdoers were utterly uprooted. And all praise is for God—Lord of all worlds
6|46|Ask ˹them, O Prophet˺, “Imagine if God were to take away your hearing or sight, or seal your hearts—who else other than God could restore it?” See ˹O Prophet˺ how We vary the signs, yet they still turn away
6|47|Ask, “Imagine if God’s punishment were to overwhelm you with or without warning—who would be destroyed other than the wrongdoers?”
6|48|We have sent messengers only as deliverers of good news and as warners. Whoever believes and does good, there will be no fear for them, nor will they grieve
6|49|But those who deny Our signs will be afflicted with punishment for their rebelliousness
6|50|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “I do not say to you that I possess God’s treasuries or know the unseen, nor do I claim to be an angel. I only follow what is revealed to me.” Say, “Are those blind ˹to the truth˺ equal to those who can see? Will you not then reflect?”
6|51|Warn with this ˹Quran˺ those who are awed by the prospect of being gathered before their Lord—when they will have no protector or intercessor besides Him—so perhaps they will be mindful ˹of Him˺
6|52|˹O Prophet!˺ Do not dismiss those ˹poor believers˺ who invoke their Lord morning and evening, seeking His pleasure. You are not accountable for them whatsoever, nor are they accountable for you. So do not dismiss them, or you will be one of the wrongdoers
6|53|In this way We have tested some by means of others, so those ˹disbelievers˺ may say, “Has God favoured these ˹poor believers˺ out of all of us?” Does God not best recognize the grateful
6|54|When the believers in Our revelations come to you, say, “Peace be upon you! Your Lord has taken upon Himself to be Merciful. Whoever among you commits evil ignorantly ˹or recklessly˺ then repents afterwards and mends their ways, then God is truly All-Forgiving, Most Merciful.”
6|55|This is how We make Our signs clear, so the way of the wicked may become distinct
6|56|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “I have been forbidden to worship those you invoke besides God.” Say, “I will not follow your desires, for I then would certainly be astray and not one of those ˹rightly˺ guided.”
6|57|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Indeed, I stand on a clear proof from my Lord—yet you have denied it. That ˹torment˺ you seek to hasten is not within my power. It is only God Who decides ˹its time˺. He declares the truth. And He is the Best of Judges.”
6|58|Say ˹also˺, “If what you seek to hasten were within my power, the matter between us would have already been settled. But God knows the wrongdoers best.”
6|59|With Him are the keys of the unseen—no one knows them except Him. And He knows what is in the land and sea. Not even a leaf falls without His knowledge, nor a grain in the darkness of the earth or anything—green or dry—but is ˹written˺ in a perfect Record
6|60|He is the One Who calls back your souls by night and knows what you do by day, then revives you daily to complete your appointed term. To Him is your ˹ultimate˺ return, then He will inform you of what you used to do
6|61|He reigns supreme over all of His creation, and sends recording-angels, watching over you. When death comes to any of you, Our angels take their soul, never neglecting this duty
6|62|Then they are ˹all˺ returned to God—their True Master. Judgment is His ˹alone˺. And He is the Swiftest Reckoner
6|63|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Who rescues you from the darkest times on land and at sea? He ˹alone˺ you call upon with humility, openly and secretly: “If You rescue us from this, we will be ever grateful.”
6|64|Say, “˹Only˺ God rescues you from this and any other distress, yet you associate others with Him ˹in worship˺.”
6|65|Say, “He ˹alone˺ has the power to unleash upon you a torment from above or below you or split you into ˹conflicting˺ factions and make you taste the violence of one another.” See how We vary the signs, so perhaps they will comprehend
6|66|Still your people ˹O Prophet˺ have rejected this ˹Quran˺, although it is the truth. Say, “I am not a keeper over you.”
6|67|Every ˹destined˺ matter has a ˹set˺ time to transpire. And you will soon come to know
6|68|And when you come across those who ridicule Our revelations, do not sit with them unless they engage in a different topic. Should Satan make you forget, then once you remember, do not ˹continue to˺ sit with the wrongdoing people
6|69|Those mindful ˹of God˺ will not be accountable for those ˹who ridicule it˺ whatsoever—their duty is to advise, so perhaps the ridiculers will abstain
6|70|And leave those who take this faith ˹of Islam˺ as mere play and amusement and are deluded by ˹their˺ worldly life. Yet remind them by this ˹Quran˺, so no one should be ruined for their misdeeds. They will have no protector or intercessor other than God. Even if they were to offer every ˹possible˺ ransom, none will be accepted from them. Those are the ones who will be ruined for their misdeeds. They will have a boiling drink and painful punishment for their disbelief
6|71|Ask ˹them, O Prophet˺, “Should we invoke, other than God, those ˹idols˺ which cannot benefit or harm us, and turn back to disbelief after God has guided us? ˹If we do so, we will be˺ like those disoriented by devils in the wilderness, while their companions call them to guidance, ˹saying˺, ‘Come to us!’ Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “God’s guidance is the ˹only˺ true guidance. And we are commanded to submit to the Lord of all worlds
6|72|establish prayer, and be mindful of Him. To Him you will all be gathered together
6|73|He is the One Who created the heavens and the earth in truth. On the Day ˹of Judgment˺ He will say, ‘Be!’ And there will be! His command is truth. All authority is His ˹alone˺ on the Day the Trumpet will be blown. He is the Knower of all—seen or unseen. And He is the All-Wise, All-Aware.”
6|74|And ˹remember˺ when Abraham said to his father, Ȃzar, “Do you take idols as gods? It is clear to me that you and your people are entirely misguided.”
6|75|We also showed Abraham the wonders of the heavens and the earth, so he would be sure in faith
6|76|When the night grew dark upon him, he saw a star and said, “This is my Lord!” But when it set, he said, “I do not love things that set.”
6|77|Then when he saw the moon rising, he said, “This one is my Lord!” But when it disappeared, he said, “If my Lord does not guide me, I will certainly be one of the misguided people.”
6|78|Then when he saw the sun shining, he said, “This must be my Lord—it is the greatest!” But again when it set, he declared, “O my people! I totally reject whatever you associate ˹with God in worship˺
6|79|I have turned my face towards the One Who has originated the heavens and the earth—being upright—and I am not one of the polytheists.”
6|80|And his people argued with him. He responded, “Are you arguing with me about God, while He has guided me? I am not afraid of whatever ˹idols˺ you associate with Him—˹none can harm me,˺ unless my Lord so wills. My Lord encompasses everything in ˹His˺ knowledge. Will you not be mindful
6|81|And how should I fear your associate-gods, while you have no fear in associating ˹others˺ with God—a practice He has never authorized? Which side has more right to security? ˹Tell me˺ if you really know!”
6|82|It is ˹only˺ those who are faithful and do not tarnish their faith with falsehood who are guaranteed security and are ˹rightly˺ guided
6|83|This was the argument We gave Abraham against his people. We elevate in rank whoever We please. Surely your Lord is All-Wise, All-Knowing
6|84|And We blessed him with Isaac and Jacob. We guided them all as We previously guided Noah and those among his descendants: David, Solomon, Job, Joseph, Moses, and Aaron. This is how We reward the good-doers
6|85|Likewise, ˹We guided˺ Zachariah, John, Jesus, and Elias, who were all of the righteous
6|86|˹We also guided˺ Ishmael, Elisha, Jonah, and Lot, favouring each over other people ˹of their time˺
6|87|And ˹We favoured˺ some of their forefathers, their descendants, and their brothers. We chose them and guided them to the Straight Path
6|88|This is God’s guidance with which He guides whoever He wills of His servants. Had they associated others with Him ˹in worship˺, their ˹good˺ deeds would have been wasted
6|89|Those were the ones to whom We gave the Scripture, wisdom, and prophethood. But if these ˹pagans˺ disbelieve in this ˹message˺, then We have already entrusted it to a people who will never disbelieve in it
6|90|These ˹prophets˺ were ˹rightly˺ guided by God, so follow their guidance. Say, “I ask no reward of you for this ˹Quran˺—it is a reminder to the whole world.”
6|91|And they have not shown God His proper reverence when they said, “God has revealed nothing to any human being.” Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Who then revealed the Book brought forth by Moses as a light and guidance for people, which you split into separate sheets—revealing some and hiding much? You have been taught ˹through this Quran˺ what neither you nor your forefathers knew.” Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “God ˹revealed it˺!” Then leave them to amuse themselves with falsehood
6|92|This is a blessed Book which We have revealed—confirming what came before it—so you may warn the Mother of Cities and everyone around it. Those who believe in the Hereafter ˹truly˺ believe in it and guard their prayers
6|93|Who does more wrong than the one who fabricates lies against God or claims, “I have received revelations!”—although nothing was revealed to them—or the one who says, “I can reveal the like of God’s revelations!”? If you ˹O Prophet˺ could only see the wrongdoers in the throes of death while the angels are stretching out their hands ˹saying˺, “Give up your souls! Today you will be rewarded with the torment of disgrace for telling lies about God and for being arrogant towards His revelations!”
6|94|˹Today˺ you have come back to Us all alone as We created you the first time—leaving behind everything We have provided you with. We do not see your intercessors with you—those you claimed were God’s partners ˹in worship˺. All your ties have been broken and all your claims have let you down.”
6|95|Indeed, God is the One Who causes seeds and fruit stones to sprout. He brings forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living. That is God! How can you then be deluded ˹from the truth˺
6|96|He causes the dawn to break, and has made the night for rest and ˹made˺ the sun and the moon ˹to travel˺ with precision. That is the design of the Almighty, All-Knowing
6|97|And He is the One Who has made the stars as your guide through the darkness of land and sea. We have already made the signs clear for people who know
6|98|And He is the One Who originated you all from a single soul, then assigned you a place to live and another to ˹be laid to˺ rest. We have already made the signs clear for people who comprehend
6|99|And He is the One Who sends down rain from the sky—causing all kinds of plants to grow—producing green stalks from which We bring forth clustered grain. And from palm trees come clusters of dates hanging within reach. ˹There are˺ also gardens of grapevines, olives, and pomegranates, similar ˹in shape˺ but dissimilar ˹in taste˺. Look at their fruit as it yields and ripens! Indeed, in these are signs for people who believe
6|100|Yet they associate the jinn with God ˹in worship˺, even though He created them, and they falsely attribute to Him sons and daughters out of ignorance. Glorified and Exalted is He above what they claim
6|101|˹He is˺ the Originator of the heavens and earth. How could He have children when He has no mate? He created all things and has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of everything
6|102|That is God—your Lord! There is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him. ˹He is˺ the Creator of all things, so worship Him ˹alone˺. And He is the Maintainer of everything
6|103|No vision can encompass Him, but He encompasses all vision. For He is the Most Subtle, All-Aware
6|104|Indeed, there have come to you insights from your Lord. So whoever chooses to see, it is for their own good. But whoever chooses to be blind, it is to their own loss. And I am not a keeper over you
6|105|And so We vary our signs to the extent that they will say, “You have studied ˹previous scriptures˺,” and We make this ˹Quran˺ clear for people who know
6|106|˹O Prophet!˺ Follow what is revealed to you from your Lord—there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him—and turn away from the polytheists
6|107|Had God willed, they would not have been polytheists. We have not appointed you as their keeper, nor are you their maintainer
6|108|˹O believers!˺ Do not insult what they invoke besides God or they will insult God spitefully out of ignorance. This is how We have made each people’s deeds appealing to them. Then to their Lord is their return, and He will inform them of what they used to do
6|109|They swear by God their most solemn oaths that if a sign were to come to them, they would certainly believe in it. Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Signs are only with God.” What will make you ˹believers˺ realize that even if a sign were to come to them, they still would not believe
6|110|We turn their hearts and eyes away ˹from the truth˺ as they refused to believe at first, leaving them to wander blindly in their defiance
6|111|Even if We had sent them the angels, made the dead speak to them, and assembled before their own eyes every sign ˹they demanded˺, they still would not have believed—unless God so willed. But most of them are ignorant ˹of this˺
6|112|And so We have made for every prophet enemies—devilish humans and jinn—whispering to one another with elegant words of deception. Had it been your Lord’s Will, they would not have done such a thing. So leave them and their deceit
6|113|so that the hearts of those who disbelieve in the Hereafter may be receptive to it, be pleased with it, and be persistent in their evil pursuits
6|114|˹Say, O Prophet,˺ “Should I seek a judge other than God while He is the One Who has revealed for you the Book ˹with the truth˺ perfectly explained?” Those who were given the Scripture know that it has been revealed ˹to you˺ from your Lord in truth. So do not be one of those who doubt
6|115|The Word of your Lord has been perfected in truth and justice. None can change His Words. And He is the All-Hearing, All- Knowing
6|116|˹O Prophet!˺ If you were to obey most of those on earth, they would lead you away from God’s Way. They follow nothing but assumptions and do nothing but lie
6|117|Indeed, your Lord knows best who has strayed from His Way and who is ˹rightly˺ guided
6|118|So eat only of what is slaughtered in God’s Name if you truly believe in His revelations
6|119|Why should you not eat of what is slaughtered in God’s Name when He has already explained to you what He has forbidden to you—except when compelled by necessity? Many ˹deviants˺ certainly mislead others by their whims out of ignorance. Surely your Lord knows the transgressors best
6|120|Shun all sin—open and secret. Indeed, those who commit sin will be punished for what they earn
6|121|Do not eat of what is not slaughtered in God’s Name. For that would certainly be ˹an act of˺ disobedience. Surely the devils whisper to their ˹human˺ associates to argue with you. If you were to obey them, then you ˹too˺ would be polytheists
6|122|Can those who had been dead, to whom We gave life and a light with which they can walk among people, be compared to those in complete darkness from which they can never emerge? That is how the misdeeds of the disbelievers have been made appealing to them
6|123|And so We have placed in every society the most wicked to conspire in it. Yet they plot only against themselves, but they fail to perceive it
6|124|Whenever a sign comes to them, they say, “We will never believe until we receive what God’s messengers received.” God knows best where to place His message. The wicked will soon be overwhelmed by humiliation from God and a severe punishment for their evil plots
6|125|Whoever God wills to guide, He opens their heart to Islam. But whoever He wills to leave astray, He makes their chest tight and constricted as if they were climbing up into the sky. This is how God dooms those who disbelieve
6|126|That is your Lord’s Path—perfectly straight. We have already made the signs clear to those who are mindful
6|127|They will have the Home of Peace with their Lord, Who will be their Guardian because of what they used to do
6|128|˹Consider˺ the Day He will gather them ˹all˺ together and say, “O assembly of jinn! You misled humans in great numbers.” And their human associates will say, “Our Lord! We benefited from each other’s company, but now we have reached the term which You appointed for us.” ˹Then˺ He will say, “The Fire is your home, yours to stay in forever, except whoever God wills to spare.” Surely your Lord is All-Wise, All-Knowing
6|129|This is how We make the wrongdoers ˹destructive˺ allies of one another because of their misdeeds
6|130|˹God will ask,˺ “O assembly of jinn and humans! Did messengers not come from among you, proclaiming My revelations and warning you of the coming of this Day of yours?” They will say, “We confess against ourselves!” For they have been deluded by ˹their˺ worldly life. And they will testify against themselves that they were disbelievers
6|131|This ˹sending of the messengers˺ is because your Lord would never destroy a society for their wrongdoing while its people are unaware ˹of the truth˺
6|132|They will each be assigned ranks according to their deeds. And your Lord is not unaware of what they do
6|133|Your Lord is the Self-Sufficient, Full of Mercy. If He wills, He can do away with you and replace you with whoever He wills, just as He produced you from the offspring of other people
6|134|Indeed, what you have been promised will certainly come to pass. And you will have no escape
6|135|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “O my people! Persist in your ways, for I ˹too˺ will persist in mine. You will soon know who will fare best in the end. Indeed, the wrongdoers will never succeed.”
6|136|The pagans set aside for God a share of the crops and cattle He created, saying, “This ˹portion˺ is for God,” so they claim, “and this ˹one˺ for our associate-gods.” Yet the portion of their associate-gods is not shared with God while God’s portion is shared with their associate-gods. What unfair judgment
6|137|Likewise, the pagans’ evil associates have made it appealing to them to kill their own children—only leading to their destruction as well as confusion in their faith. Had it been God’s Will, they would not have done such a thing. So leave them and their falsehood
6|138|They say, “These cattle and crops are reserved—none may eat them except those we permit,” so they claim. Some other cattle are exempted from labour and others are not slaughtered in God’s Name—falsely attributing lies to Him. He will repay them for their lies
6|139|They ˹also˺ say, “The offspring of this cattle is reserved for our males and forbidden to our females; but if it is stillborn, they may all share it.” He will repay them for their falsehood. Surely He is All-Wise, All-Knowing
6|140|Lost indeed are those who have murdered their own children foolishly out of ignorance and have forbidden what God has provided for them—falsely attributing lies to God. They have certainly strayed and are not ˹rightly˺ guided
6|141|He is the One Who produces gardens—both cultivated and wild—and palm trees, crops of different flavours, olives, and pomegranates—similar ˹in shape˺, but dissimilar ˹in taste˺. Eat of the fruit they bear and pay the dues at harvest, but do not waste. Surely He does not like the wasteful
6|142|Some cattle are fit for labour, others are too small. Eat of what God has provided for you and do not follow Satan’s footsteps. Certainly, he is your sworn enemy
6|143|˹God has created˺ four pairs: a pair of sheep and a pair of goats—ask ˹them, O Prophet˺, “Has He forbidden ˹to you˺ the two males or the two females or what is in the wombs of the two females? Tell me with knowledge, if what you say is true.”—
6|144|and a pair of camels and a pair of oxen. Ask ˹them˺, “Has He forbidden ˹to you˺ the two males or the two females or what is in the wombs of the two females? Or were you present when God gave you this commandment?” Who does more wrong than those who fabricate lies against God to mislead others without ˹any˺ knowledge? Surely God does not guide the wrongdoing people
6|145|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “I do not find in what has been revealed to me anything forbidden to eat except carrion, running blood, swine—which is impure—or a sinful offering in the name of any other than God. But if someone is compelled by necessity—neither driven by desire nor exceeding immediate need—then surely your Lord is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful.”
6|146|For those who are Jewish, We forbade every animal with undivided hoofs and the fat of oxen and sheep except what is joined to their backs or intestines or mixed with bone. In this way We rewarded them for their violations. And We are certainly truthful
6|147|But if they deny you ˹O Prophet˺, say, “Your Lord is infinite in mercy, yet His punishment will not be averted from the wicked people.”
6|148|The polytheists will argue, “Had it been God’s Will, neither we nor our forefathers would have associated others with Him ˹in worship˺ or made anything unlawful.” Likewise, those before them rejected the truth until they tasted Our punishment. Ask ˹them, O Prophet˺, “Do you have any knowledge that you can produce for us? Surely you follow nothing but ˹false˺ assumptions and you do nothing but lie.”
6|149|Say, “God has the most conclusive argument. Had it been His Will, He would have easily imposed guidance upon all of you.”
6|150|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Bring your witnesses who can testify that God has forbidden this.” If they ˹falsely˺ testify, do not testify with them. And do not follow the desires of those who deny Our proofs, disbelieve in the Hereafter, and set up equals with their Lord
6|151|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Come! Let me recite to you what your Lord has forbidden to you: do not associate others with Him ˹in worship˺. ˹Do not fail to˺ honour your parents. Do not kill your children for fear of poverty. We provide for you and for them. Do not come near indecencies, openly or secretly. Do not take a ˹human˺ life—made sacred by God—except with ˹legal˺ right. This is what He has commanded you, so perhaps you will understand
6|152|And do not come near the wealth of the orphan—unless intending to enhance it—until they attain maturity. Give full measure and weigh with justice. We never require of any soul more than what it can afford. Whenever you speak, maintain justice—even regarding a close relative. And fulfil your covenant with God. This is what He has commanded you, so perhaps you will be mindful
6|153|Indeed, that is My Path—perfectly straight. So follow it and do not follow other ways, for they will lead you away from His Way. This is what He has commanded you, so perhaps you will be conscious ˹of God˺.”
6|154|Additionally, We gave Moses the Scripture, completing the favour upon those who do good, detailing everything, and as a guide and a mercy, so perhaps they would be certain of the meeting with their Lord
6|155|This is a blessed Book We have revealed. So follow it and be mindful ˹of God˺, so you may be shown mercy
6|156|You ˹pagans˺ can no longer say, “Scriptures were only revealed to two groups before us and we were unaware of their teachings.”
6|157|Nor can you say, “If only the Scriptures had been revealed to us, we would have been better guided than they.” Now there has come to you from your Lord a clear proof—a guide and mercy. Who then does more wrong than those who deny God’s revelations and turn away from them? We will reward those who turn away from Our revelations with a dreadful punishment for turning away
6|158|Are they awaiting the coming of the angels, or your Lord ˹Himself˺, or some of your Lord’s ˹major˺ signs? On the Day your Lord’s signs arrive, belief will not benefit those who did not believe earlier or those who did no good through their faith. Say, “Keep waiting! We too are waiting.”
6|159|Indeed, you ˹O Prophet˺ are not responsible whatsoever for those who have divided their faith and split into sects. Their judgment rests only with God. And He will inform them of what they used to do
6|160|Whoever comes with a good deed will be rewarded tenfold. But whoever comes with a bad deed will be punished for only one. None will be wronged
6|161|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Surely my Lord has guided me to the Straight Path, a perfect way, the faith of Abraham, the upright, who was not one of the polytheists.”
6|162|Say, “Surely my prayer, my worship, my life, and my death are all for God—Lord of all worlds
6|163|He has no partner. So I am commanded, and so I am the first to submit.”
6|164|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Should I seek a lord other than God while He is the Lord of everything?” No one will reap except what they sow. No soul burdened with sin will bear the burden of another. Then to your Lord is your return, and He will inform you of your differences
6|165|He is the One Who has placed you as successors on earth and elevated some of you in rank over others, so He may test you with what He has given you. Surely your Lord is swift in punishment, but He is certainly All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
7|1|Alif-Lãm-Mĩm-Ṣãd
7|2|˹This is˺ a Book sent down to you ˹O Prophet˺—do not let anxiety into your heart regarding it—so with it you may warn ˹the disbelievers˺, and as a reminder to the believers
7|3|Follow what has been sent down to you from your Lord, and do not take others as guardians besides Him. How seldom are you mindful
7|4|˹Imagine˺ how many societies We have destroyed! Our torment took them by surprise ˹while sleeping˺ at night or midday
7|5|Their only cry—when overwhelmed by Our torment—was, “We have indeed been wrongdoers.”
7|6|We will surely question those who received messengers and We will question the messengers ˹themselves˺
7|7|Then We will give them a full account with sure knowledge—for We were never absent
7|8|The weighing on that Day will be just. As for those whose scale will be heavy ˹with good deeds˺, ˹only˺ they will be successful
7|9|But those whose scale is light, they have doomed themselves for wrongfully denying Our signs
7|10|We have indeed established you on earth and provided you with a means of livelihood. ˹Yet˺ you seldom give any thanks
7|11|Surely We created you, then shaped you, then said to the angels, “Prostrate before Adam,” so they all did—but not Iblîs, who refused to prostrate with the others
7|12|God asked, “What prevented you from prostrating when I commanded you?” He replied, “I am better than he is: You created me from fire and him from clay.”
7|13|God said, “Then get down from Paradise! It is not for you to be arrogant here. So get out! You are truly one of the disgraced.”
7|14|He appealed, “Then delay my end until the Day of their resurrection.”
7|15|God said, “You are delayed ˹until the appointed Day˺.”
7|16|He said, “For leaving me to stray I will lie in ambush for them on Your Straight Path
7|17|I will approach them from their front, their back, their right, their left, and then You will find most of them ungrateful.”
7|18|God said, “Get out of Paradise! You are disgraced and rejected! I will certainly fill up Hell with you and your followers all together.”
7|19|˹God said,˺ “O Adam! Live with your wife in Paradise and eat from wherever you please, but do not approach this tree, or else you will be wrongdoers.”
7|20|Then Satan tempted them in order to expose what was hidden of their nakedness. He said, “Your Lord has forbidden this tree to you only to prevent you from becoming angels or immortals.”
7|21|And he swore to them, “I am truly your sincere advisor.”
7|22|So he brought about their fall through deception. And when they tasted of the tree, their nakedness was exposed to them, prompting them to cover themselves with leaves from Paradise. Then their Lord called out to them, “Did I not forbid you from that tree and ˹did I not˺ tell you that Satan is your sworn enemy?”
7|23|They replied, “Our Lord! We have wronged ourselves. If You do not forgive us and have mercy on us, we will certainly be losers.”
7|24|God said, “Descend as enemies to each other. You will find in the earth a residence and provision for your appointed stay.”
7|25|He added, “There you will live, there you will die, and from there you will be resurrected.”
7|26|O children of Adam! We have provided for you clothing to cover your nakedness and as an adornment. However, the best clothing is righteousness. This is one of God’s bounties, so perhaps you will be mindful
7|27|O children of Adam! Do not let Satan deceive you as he tempted your parents out of Paradise and caused their cover to be removed in order to expose their nakedness. Surely he and his soldiers watch you from where you cannot see them. We have made the devils allies of those who disbelieve
7|28|Whenever they commit a shameful deed, they say, “We found our forefathers doing it and God has commanded us to do it.” Say, “No! God never commands what is shameful. How can you attribute to God what you do not know?”
7|29|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “My Lord has commanded uprightness and dedication ˹to Him alone˺ in worship, calling upon Him with sincere devotion. Just as He first brought you into being, you will be brought to life again.”
7|30|He has guided some, while others are destined to stray. They have taken devils as their masters instead of God—thinking they are ˹rightly˺ guided
7|31|O Children of Adam! Dress properly whenever you are at worship. Eat and drink, but do not waste. Surely He does not like the wasteful
7|32|Ask, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Who has forbidden the adornments and lawful provisions God has brought forth for His servants?” Say, “They are for the enjoyment of the believers in this worldly life, but they will be exclusively theirs on the Day of Judgment. This is how We make Our revelations clear for people of knowledge.”
7|33|Say, “My Lord has only forbidden open and secret indecencies, sinfulness, unjust aggression, associating ˹others˺ with God ˹in worship˺—a practice He has never authorized—and attributing to God what you do not know.”
7|34|For each community there is an appointed term. When their time arrives, they can neither delay it for a moment, nor could they advance it
7|35|O children of Adam! When messengers from among yourselves come to you reciting My revelations—whoever shuns evil and mends their ways, there will be no fear for them, nor will they grieve
7|36|But those who receive Our revelations with denial and arrogance will be the residents of the Fire. They will be there forever
7|37|Who does more wrong than those who fabricate lies against God or deny His revelations? They will receive what is destined for them, until Our messenger-angels arrive to take their souls, asking them, “Where are those ˹false gods˺ you used to invoke besides God?” They will cry, “They have failed us,” and they will confess against themselves that they were indeed disbelievers
7|38|God will say, “Enter the Fire along with the ˹evil˺ groups of jinn and humans that preceded you.” Whenever a group enters Hell, it will curse the preceding one until they are all gathered inside, the followers will say about their leaders, “Our Lord! They have misled us, so multiply their torment in the Fire.” He will answer, “It has already been multiplied for all, but you do not know.”
7|39|Then the leaders will say to their followers, “You were no better than us! So taste the torment for what you used to commit.”
7|40|Surely those who receive our revelations with denial and arrogance, the gates of heaven will not be opened for them, nor will they enter Paradise until a camel passes through the eye of a needle. This is how We reward the wicked
7|41|Hell will be their bed; flames will be their cover. This is how We reward the wrongdoers
7|42|As for those who believe and do good—We never require of any soul more than what it can afford—it is they who will be the residents of Paradise. They will be there forever
7|43|We will remove whatever bitterness they had in their hearts. Rivers will flow under their feet. And they will say, “Praise be to God for guiding us to this. We would have never been guided if God had not guided us. The messengers of our Lord had certainly come with the truth.” It will be announced to them, “This is Paradise awarded to you for what you used to do.”
7|44|The residents of Paradise will call out to the residents of the Fire, “We have certainly found our Lord’s promise to be true. Have you too found your Lord’s promise to be true?” They will reply, “Yes, we have!” Then a caller will announce to both, “May God’s condemnation be upon the wrongdoers
7|45|those who hindered ˹others˺ from God’s Way, strived to make it ˹appear˺ crooked, and disbelieved in the Hereafter.”
7|46|There will be a barrier between Paradise and Hell. And on the heights ˹of that barrier˺ will be people who will recognize ˹the residents of˺ both by their appearance. They will call out to the residents of Paradise, “Peace be upon you!” They will have not yet entered Paradise, but eagerly hope to
7|47|When their eyes will turn towards the residents of Hell, they will pray, “Our Lord! Do not join us with the wrongdoing people.”
7|48|Those on the heights will call out to some ˹tyrants in the Fire˺, who they will recognize by their appearance, saying, “Your large numbers and arrogance are of no use ˹today˺
7|49|Are these ˹humble believers˺ the ones you swore would never be shown God’s mercy?” ˹Finally, those on the heights will be told:˺ “Enter Paradise! There will be no fear for you, nor will you grieve.”
7|50|The residents of the Fire will then cry out to the residents of Paradise, “Aid us with some water or any provision God has granted you.” They will reply, “God has forbidden both to the disbelievers
7|51|those who took this faith ˹of Islam˺ as mere amusement and play and were deluded by ˹their˺ worldly life.” ˹God will say,˺ “Today We will ignore them just as they ignored the coming of this Day of theirs and for rejecting Our revelations.”
7|52|We have certainly brought them a Book which We explained with knowledge—a guide and mercy for those who believe
7|53|Do they only await the fulfilment ˹of its warning˺? The Day it will be fulfilled, those who ignored it before will say, “The messengers of our Lord certainly came with the truth. Are there any intercessors who can plead on our behalf? Or can we be sent back so we may do ˹good,˺ unlike what we used to do?” They will have certainly ruined themselves, and whatever ˹gods˺ they fabricated will fail them
7|54|Indeed your Lord is God Who created the heavens and the earth in six Days, then established Himself on the Throne. He makes the day and night overlap in rapid succession. He created the sun, the moon, and the stars—all subjected by His command. The creation and the command belong to Him ˹alone˺. Blessed is God—Lord of all worlds
7|55|Call upon your Lord humbly and secretly. Surely He does not like the transgressors
7|56|Do not spread corruption in the land after it has been set in order. And call upon Him with hope and fear. Indeed, God’s mercy is always close to the good-doers
7|57|He is the One Who sends the winds ushering in His mercy. When they bear heavy clouds, We drive them to a lifeless land and then cause rain to fall, producing every type of fruit. Similarly, We will bring the dead to life, so perhaps you will be mindful
7|58|The fertile land produces abundantly by the Will of its Lord, whereas the infertile land hardly produces anything. This is how We vary ˹Our˺ lessons to those who are thankful
7|59|Indeed, We sent Noah to his people. He said, “O my people! Worship God—you have no other god except Him. I truly fear for you the torment of a tremendous Day.”
7|60|But the chiefs of his people said, “We surely see that you are clearly misguided.”
7|61|He replied, “O my people! I am not misguided! But I am a messenger from the Lord of all worlds
7|62|conveying to you my Lord’s messages and giving you ˹sincere˺ advice. And I know from God what you do not know
7|63|Do you find it astonishing that a reminder should come to you from your Lord through one of your own, warning you, so you may beware and perhaps be shown mercy?”
7|64|But they rejected him, so We saved him and those with him in the Ark, and drowned those who rejected Our signs. They were certainly a blind people
7|65|And to the people of ’Âd We sent their brother Hûd. He said, “O my people! Worship God—you have no other god except Him. Will you not then fear Him?”
7|66|The disbelieving chiefs of his people responded, “We surely see you as a fool, and we certainly think you are a liar.”
7|67|Hûd replied, “O my people! I am no fool! But I am a messenger from the Lord of all worlds
7|68|conveying to you my Lord’s messages. And I am your sincere advisor
7|69|Do you find it astonishing that a reminder should come to you from your Lord through one of your own so he may warn you? Remember that He made you successors after the people of Noah and increased you greatly in stature. So remember God’s favours, so you may be successful.”
7|70|They said, “Have you come to us so that we would worship God alone and abandon what our forefathers used to worship? Then bring us what you threaten us with, if what you say is true!”
7|71|He said, “You will certainly be subjected to your Lord’s torment and wrath. Do you dispute with me regarding the so-called gods which you and your forefathers have made up—a practice God has never authorized? Then wait! I too am waiting with you.”
7|72|So We saved him and those with him by Our mercy and uprooted those who denied Our signs. They were not believers
7|73|And to the people of Thamûd We sent their brother Ṣâliḥ. He said, “O my people! Worship God—you have no other god except Him. A clear proof has come to you from your Lord: this is God’s she-camel as a sign to you. So leave her to graze ˹freely˺ on God’s land and do not harm her, or else you will be overcome by a painful punishment
7|74|Remember when He made you successors after ’Âd and established you in the land—˹and˺ you built palaces on its plains and carved homes into mountains. So remember God’s favours, and do not go about spreading corruption in the land.”
7|75|The arrogant chiefs of his people asked the lowly who believed among them, “Are you certain that Ṣâliḥ has been sent by his Lord?” They replied, “We certainly believe in what he has been sent with.”
7|76|The arrogant said, “We surely reject what you believe in.”
7|77|Then they killed the she-camel—defying their Lord’s command—and challenged ˹Ṣâliḥ˺, “Bring us what you threaten us with, if you are ˹truly˺ one of the messengers.”
7|78|Then an ˹overwhelming˺ earthquake struck them, and they fell lifeless in their homes
7|79|So he turned away from them, saying, “O my people! Surely I conveyed to you my Lord’s message and gave you ˹sincere˺ advice, but you do not like ˹sincere˺ advisors.”
7|80|And ˹remember˺ when Lot scolded ˹the men of˺ his people, ˹saying,˺ “Do you commit a shameful deed that no man has ever done before
7|81|You lust after men instead of women! You are certainly transgressors.”
7|82|But his people’s only response was to say, “Expel them from your land! They are a people who wish to remain chaste!”
7|83|So We saved him and his family except his wife, who was one of the doomed
7|84|We poured upon them a rain ˹of brimstone˺. See what was the end of the wicked
7|85|And to the people of Midian We sent their brother Shu’aib. He said, “O my people! Worship God—you have no other god except Him. A clear proof has already come to you from your Lord. So give just measure and weight, do not defraud people of their property, nor spread corruption in the land after it has been set in order. This is for your own good, if you are ˹truly˺ believers
7|86|And do not lie in ambush on every road—threatening and hindering those who believe in God from His Path and striving to make it ˹appear˺ crooked. Remember when you were few, then He increased you in number. And consider the fate of the corruptors
7|87|If some of you do believe in what I have been sent with while others do not, then be patient until God judges between us. He is the Best of Judges.”
7|88|The arrogant chiefs of his people threatened, “O Shu’aib! We will certainly expel you and your fellow believers from our land, unless you return to our faith.” He replied, “Even if we hate it
7|89|We would surely be fabricating a lie against God if we were to return to your faith after God has saved us from it. It does not befit us to return to it unless it is the Will of God, our Lord. Our Lord has encompassed everything in ˹His˺ knowledge. In God we trust. Our Lord! Judge between us and our people with truth. You are the best of those who judge.”
7|90|The disbelieving chiefs of his people threatened, “If you follow Shu’aib, you will surely be losers!”
7|91|Then an ˹overwhelming˺ earthquake struck them and they fell lifeless in their homes
7|92|Those who rejected Shu’aib were ˹wiped out˺ as if they had never lived there. Those who rejected Shu’aib were the true losers
7|93|He turned away from them, saying, “O my people! Indeed, I have delivered to you the messages of my Lord and gave you ˹sincere˺ advice. How can I then grieve for those who chose to disbelieve?”
7|94|Whenever We sent a prophet to a society, We afflicted its ˹disbelieving˺ people with suffering and adversity, so perhaps they would be humbled
7|95|Then We changed their adversity to prosperity until they flourished and argued ˹falsely˺, “Our forefathers ˹too˺ had been visited by adversity and prosperity.” So We seized them by surprise, while they were unaware
7|96|Had the people of those societies been faithful and mindful ˹of God˺, We would have overwhelmed them with blessings from heaven and earth. But they disbelieved, so We seized them for what they used to commit
7|97|Did the people of those societies feel secure that Our punishment would not come upon them by night while they were asleep
7|98|Or did they feel secure that Our punishment would not come upon them by day while they were at play
7|99|Did they feel secure against God’s planning? None would feel secure from God’s planning except the losers
7|100|Is it not clear to those who take over the land after ˹the destruction of˺ its former residents that—if We will—We can punish them ˹too˺ for their sins and seal their hearts so they will not hear ˹the truth˺
7|101|We have narrated to you ˹O Prophet˺ some of the stories of those societies. Surely, their messengers came to them with clear proofs, but still they would not believe in what they had already denied. This is how God seals the hearts of the disbelievers
7|102|We did not find most of them true to their covenant. Rather, We found most of them truly rebellious
7|103|Then after them We sent Moses with Our signs to Pharaoh and his chiefs, but they wrongfully rejected them. See what was the end of the corruptors
7|104|And Moses said, “O Pharaoh! I am truly a messenger from the Lord of all worlds
7|105|obliged to say nothing about God except the truth. Indeed, I have come to you with clear proof from your Lord, so let the children of Israel go with me.”
7|106|Pharaoh said, “If you have come with a sign, then bring it if what you say is true.”
7|107|So Moses threw down his staff and—behold!—it became a real snake
7|108|Then he drew his hand ˹out of his collar˺ and it was ˹shining˺ white for all to see
7|109|The chiefs of Pharaoh’s people said, “He is indeed a skilled magician
7|110|who seeks to drive you from your land.” ˹So Pharaoh asked,˺ “What do you propose?”
7|111|They replied, “Let him and his brother wait and send mobilizers to all cities
7|112|to bring you every clever magician.”
7|113|The magicians came to Pharaoh, saying, “Shall we receive a ˹suitable˺ reward if we prevail?”
7|114|He replied, “Yes, and you will certainly be among those closest to me.”
7|115|They asked, “O Moses! Will you cast, or shall we be the first to cast?”
7|116|Moses said, “You first.” So when they did, they deceived the eyes of the people, stunned them, and made a great display of magic
7|117|Then We inspired Moses, “Throw down your staff,” and—behold!—it devoured the objects of their illusion
7|118|So the truth prevailed and their illusions failed
7|119|So Pharaoh and his people were defeated right there and put to shame
7|120|And the magicians fell down, prostrating
7|121|They declared, “We ˹now˺ believe in the Lord of all worlds—
7|122|the Lord of Moses and Aaron.”
7|123|Pharaoh threatened, “How dare you believe in him before I give you permission? This must be a conspiracy you devised in the city to drive out its people, but soon you will see
7|124|I will certainly cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides, then crucify you all.”
7|125|They responded, “Surely to our Lord we will ˹all˺ return
7|126|Your rage towards us is only because we believed in the signs of our Lord when they came to us. Our Lord! Shower us with perseverance, and let us die while submitting ˹to You˺.”
7|127|The chiefs of Pharaoh’s people protested, “Are you going to leave Moses and his people free to spread corruption in the land and abandon you and your gods?” He responded, “We will kill their sons and keep their women. We will completely dominate them.”
7|128|Moses reassured his people, “Seek God’s help and be patient. Indeed, the earth belongs to God ˹alone˺. He grants it to whoever He chooses of His servants. The ultimate outcome belongs ˹only˺ to the righteous.”
7|129|They complained, “We have always been oppressed—before and after you came to us ˹with the message˺.” He replied, “Perhaps your Lord will destroy your enemy and make you successors in the land to see what you will do.”
7|130|Indeed, We afflicted Pharaoh’s people with famine and shortage of crops so they might come back ˹to their senses˺
7|131|In times of prosperity, they said, “This is what we deserve,” but in adversity, they blamed it on Moses and those with him. Surely all is destined by God. Yet most of them did not know
7|132|They said, “No matter what sign you may bring to deceive us, we will never believe in you.”
7|133|So We plagued them with floods, locusts, lice, frogs, and blood—all as clear signs, but they persisted in arrogance and were a wicked people
7|134|When tormented, they pleaded, “O Moses! Pray to your Lord on our behalf, by virtue of the covenant He made with you. If you help remove this torment from us, we will certainly believe in you and let the Children of Israel go with you.”
7|135|But as soon as We removed the torment from them—until they met their inevitable fate—they broke their promise
7|136|So We inflicted punishment upon them, drowning them in the sea for denying Our signs and being heedless of them
7|137|And ˹so˺ We made the oppressed people successors of the eastern and western lands, which We had showered with blessings. ˹In this way˺ the noble Word of your Lord was fulfilled for the Children of Israel for what they had endured. And We destroyed what Pharaoh and his people constructed and what they established
7|138|We brought the Children of Israel across the sea and they came upon a people devoted to idols. They demanded, “O Moses! Make for us a god like their gods.” He replied, “Indeed, you are a people acting ignorantly
7|139|What they follow is certainly doomed to destruction and their deeds are in vain.”
7|140|He added, “Shall I seek for you a god other than God, while He has honoured you above the others?”
7|141|And ˹remember˺ when We rescued you from the people of Pharaoh, who afflicted you with dreadful torment—killing your sons and keeping your women. That was a severe test from your Lord
7|142|We appointed for Moses thirty nights then added another ten—completing his Lord’s term of forty nights. Moses commanded his brother Aaron, “Take my place among my people, do what is right, and do not follow the way of the corruptors.”
7|143|When Moses came at the appointed time and his Lord spoke to him, he asked, “My Lord! Reveal Yourself to me so I may see You.” God answered, “You cannot see Me! But look at the mountain. If it remains firm in its place, only then will you see Me.” When his Lord appeared to the mountain, He levelled it to dust and Moses collapsed unconscious. When he recovered, he cried, “Glory be to You! I turn to You in repentance and I am the first of the believers.”
7|144|God said, “O Moses! I have ˹already˺ elevated you above all others by My messages and speech. So hold firmly to what I have given you and be grateful.”
7|145|We wrote for him on the Tablets ˹the fundamentals˺ of everything; commandments and explanations of all things. ˹We commanded,˺ “Hold to this firmly and ask your people to take the best of it. I will soon show ˹all of˺ you the home of the rebellious
7|146|I will turn away from My signs those who act unjustly with arrogance in the land. And even if they were to see every sign, they still would not believe in them. If they see the Right Path, they will not take it. But if they see a crooked path, they will follow it. This is because they denied Our signs and were heedless of them
7|147|The deeds of those who deny Our signs and the meeting ˹with God˺ in the Hereafter will be in vain. Will they be rewarded except for what they have done?”
7|148|In the absence of Moses, his people made from their ˹golden˺ jewellery an idol of a calf that made a lowing sound. Did they not see that it could neither speak to them nor guide them to the ˹Right˺ Path? Still they took it as a god and were wrongdoers
7|149|Later, when they were filled with remorse and realized they had gone astray, they cried, “If our Lord does not have mercy on us and forgive us, we will certainly be losers.”
7|150|Upon Moses’ return to his people, ˹totally˺ furious and sorrowful, he said, “What an evil thing you committed in my absence! Did you want to hasten your Lord’s torment?” Then he threw down the Tablets and grabbed his brother by the hair, dragging him closer. Aaron pleaded, “O son of my mother! The people overpowered me and were about to kill me. So do not ˹humiliate me and˺ make my enemies rejoice, nor count me among the wrongdoing people.”
7|151|Moses prayed, “My Lord! Forgive me and my brother! And admit us into Your mercy. You are the Most Merciful of the merciful.”
7|152|Those who worshipped the calf will certainly be afflicted with God’s wrath as well as disgrace in the life of this world. This is how We reward those who invent falsehood
7|153|But those who commit evil, then repent and become ˹true˺ believers, your Lord will certainly be All-Forgiving, Most-Merciful
7|154|When Moses’ anger subsided, he took up the Tablets whose text contained guidance and mercy for those who stand in awe of their Lord
7|155|Moses chose seventy men from among his people for Our appointment and, when they were seized by an earthquake, he cried, “My Lord! Had You willed, You could have destroyed them long ago, and me as well. Will You destroy us for what the foolish among us have done? This is only a test from You—by which You allow whoever you will to stray and guide whoever You will. You are our Guardian. So forgive us and have mercy on us. You are the best forgiver
7|156|Ordain for us what is good in this life and the next. Indeed, we have turned to You ˹in repentance˺.” God replied, “I will inflict My torment on whoever I will. But My mercy encompasses everything. I will ordain mercy for those who shun evil, pay alms-tax, and believe in Our revelations
7|157|“˹They are˺ the ones who follow the Messenger, the unlettered Prophet, whose description they find in their Torah and the Gospel. He commands them to do good and forbids them from evil, permits for them what is lawful and forbids to them what is impure, and relieves them from their burdens and the shackles that bound them. ˹Only˺ those who believe in him, honour and support him, and follow the light sent down to him will be successful.”
7|158|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “O humanity! I am God’s Messenger to you all. To Him ˹alone˺ belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. There is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him. He gives life and causes death.” So believe in God and His Messenger, the unlettered Prophet, who believes in God and His revelations. And follow him, so you may be ˹rightly˺ guided
7|159|There are some among the people of Moses who guide with the truth and establish justice accordingly
7|160|We divided them into twelve tribes—each as a community. And We revealed to Moses, when his people asked for water, “Strike the rock with your staff.” Then twelve springs gushed out. Each tribe knew its drinking place. We shaded them with clouds and sent down to them manna and quails, ˹saying˺, “Eat from the good things We have provided for you.” They ˹certainly˺ did not wrong Us, but wronged themselves
7|161|And ˹remember˺ when it was said to them, “Enter this city ˹of Jerusalem˺ and eat from wherever you please. Say, ‘Absolve us,’ and enter the gate with humility. We will forgive your sins, ˹and˺ We will multiply the reward for the good-doers.”
7|162|But the wrongdoers among them changed the words they were commanded to say. So We sent down a punishment from the heavens upon them for their wrongdoing
7|163|Ask them ˹O Prophet˺ about ˹the people of˺ the town which was by the sea, who broke the Sabbath. During the Sabbath, ˹abundant˺ fish would come to them clearly visible, but on other days the fish were never seen. In this way We tested them for their rebelliousness
7|164|When some of ˹the righteous among˺ them questioned ˹their fellow Sabbath-keepers˺, “Why do you ˹bother to˺ warn those ˹Sabbath-breakers˺ who will either be destroyed or severely punished by God?” They replied, “Just to be free from your Lord’s blame, and so perhaps they may abstain.”
7|165|When they ignored the warning they were given, We rescued those who used to warn against evil and overtook the wrongdoers with a dreadful punishment for their rebelliousness
7|166|But when they stubbornly persisted in violation, We said to them, “Be disgraced apes!”
7|167|And ˹remember, O Prophet,˺ when your Lord declared that He would send against them others who would make them suffer terribly until the Day of Judgment. Indeed, your Lord is swift in punishment, but He is certainly All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
7|168|We dispersed them through the land in groups—some were righteous, others were less so. We tested them with prosperity and adversity, so perhaps they would return ˹to the Right Path˺
7|169|Then they were succeeded by other generations who inherited the Scripture. They indulged in unlawful gains, claiming, “We will be forgiven ˹after all˺.” And if similar gain came their way, they would seize it. Was a covenant not taken from them in the Scripture that they would not say anything about God except the truth? And they were already well-versed in its teachings. But the ˹eternal˺ Home of the Hereafter is far better for those mindful ˹of God˺. Will you not then understand
7|170|As for those who firmly abide by the Scripture and establish prayer—surely We never discount the reward of those acting righteously
7|171|And ˹remember˺ when We raised the mountain over them as if it were a cloud and they thought it would fall on them. ˹We said,˺ “Hold firmly to that ˹Scripture˺ which We have given you and observe its teachings so perhaps you will become mindful ˹of God˺.”
7|172|And ˹remember˺ when your Lord brought forth from the loins of the children of Adam their descendants and had them testify regarding themselves. ˹God asked,˺ “Am I not your Lord?” They replied, “Yes, You are! We testify.” ˹He cautioned,˺ “Now you have no right to say on Judgment Day, ‘We were not aware of this.’
7|173|Nor say, ‘It was our forefathers who had associated others ˹with God in worship˺ and we, as their descendants, followed in their footsteps. Will you then destroy us for the falsehood they invented?’”
7|174|This is how We make our signs clear, so perhaps they will return ˹to the Right Path˺
7|175|And relate to them ˹O Prophet˺ the story of the one to whom We gave Our signs, but he abandoned them, so Satan took hold of him, and he became a deviant
7|176|If We had willed, We would have elevated him with Our signs, but he clung to this life—following his evil desires. His example is that of a dog: if you chase it away, it pants, and if you leave it, it ˹still˺ pants. This is the example of the people who deny Our signs. So narrate ˹to them˺ stories ˹of the past˺, so perhaps they will reflect
7|177|What an evil example of those who denied Our signs! They ˹only˺ wronged their own souls
7|178|Whoever God guides is truly guided. And whoever He leaves to stray, they are the ˹true˺ losers
7|179|Indeed, We have destined many jinn and humans for Hell. They have hearts they do not understand with, eyes they do not see with, and ears they do not hear with. They are like cattle. In fact, they are even less guided! Such ˹people˺ are ˹entirely˺ heedless
7|180|God has the Most Beautiful Names. So call upon Him by them, and keep away from those who abuse His Names. They will be punished for what they used to do
7|181|And among those We created is a group that guides with the truth and establishes justice accordingly
7|182|As for those who deny Our signs, We will gradually draw them to destruction in ways they cannot comprehend
7|183|I ˹only˺ delay their end for a while, but My planning is flawless
7|184|Have they not ever given it a thought? Their fellow man is not insane. He is only sent with a clear warning
7|185|Have they ever reflected on the wonders of the heavens and the earth, and everything God has created, and that perhaps their end is near? So what message after this ˹Quran˺ would they believe in
7|186|Whoever God allows to stray, none can guide, leaving them to wander blindly in their defiance
7|187|They ask you ˹O Prophet˺ regarding the Hour, “When will it be?” Say, “That knowledge is only with my Lord. He alone will reveal it when the time comes. It is too tremendous for the heavens and the earth and will only take you by surprise.” They ask you as if you had full knowledge of it. Say, “That knowledge is only with God, but most people do not know.”
7|188|Say, “I have no power to benefit or protect myself, except by the Will of God. If I had known the unknown, I would have benefited myself enormously, and no harm would have ever touched me. I am only a warner and deliverer of good news for those who believe.”
7|189|He is the One Who created you from a single soul, then from it made its spouse so he may find comfort in her. After he had been united with her, she carried a light burden that developed gradually. When it grew heavy, they prayed to God, their Lord, “If you grant us good offspring, we will certainly be grateful.”
7|190|But when He granted their descendants good offspring, they associated false gods in what He has given them. Exalted is God above what they associate ˹with Him˺
7|191|Do they associate ˹with God˺ those ˹idols˺ which cannot create anything, but are in fact created
7|192|which cannot help them, or even help themselves
7|193|And if you ˹idolaters˺ call upon them for guidance, they cannot respond to you. It is all the same whether you call them or remain silent
7|194|Those ˹idols˺ you invoke besides God are created beings like yourselves. So call upon them and see if they will answer you, if your claims are true
7|195|Do they have feet to walk with? Or hands to hold with? Or eyes to see with? Or ears to hear with? Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Call upon your associate-gods and conspire against me without delay
7|196|“Indeed, my Protector is God Who has revealed this Book. For He ˹alone˺ protects the righteous
7|197|But those ˹false gods˺ you call besides Him can neither help you nor even themselves.”
7|198|If you ˹idolaters˺ call them to guidance, they cannot hear. And you ˹O Prophet˺ may see them facing towards you, but they cannot see
7|199|Be gracious, enjoin what is right, and turn away from those who act ignorantly
7|200|If you are tempted by Satan, then seek refuge with God. Surely He is All-Hearing, All-Knowing
7|201|Indeed, when Satan whispers to those mindful ˹of God˺, they remember ˹their Lord˺ then they start to see ˹things˺ clearly
7|202|But the devils persistently plunge their ˹human˺ associates deeper into wickedness, sparing no effort
7|203|If you ˹O Prophet˺ do not bring them a sign ˹which they demanded˺, they ask, “Why do you not make it yourself?” Say, “I only follow what is revealed to me from my Lord. This ˹Quran˺ is an insight from your Lord—a guide and a mercy for those who believe.”
7|204|When the Quran is recited, listen to it attentively and be silent, so you may be shown mercy
7|205|Remember your Lord inwardly with humility and reverence and in a moderate tone of voice, both morning and evening. And do not be one of the heedless
7|206|Surely those ˹angels˺ nearest to your Lord are not too proud to worship Him. They glorify Him. And to Him they prostrate
8|1|They ask you ˹O Prophet˺ regarding the spoils of war. Say, “Their distribution is decided by God and His Messenger. So be mindful of God, settle your affairs, and obey God and His Messenger if you are ˹true˺ believers.”
8|2|The ˹true˺ believers are only those whose hearts tremble at the remembrance of God, whose faith increases when His revelations are recited to them, and who put their trust in their Lord
8|3|˹They are˺ those who establish prayer and donate from what We have provided for them
8|4|It is they who are the true believers. They will have elevated ranks, forgiveness, and an honourable provision from their Lord
8|5|Similarly, when your Lord brought you ˹O Prophet˺ out of your home for a just cause, a group of believers was totally against it
8|6|They disputed with you about the truth after it had been made clear, as if they were being driven to death with their eyes wide open
8|7|˹Remember, O believers,˺ when God promised ˹to give˺ you the upper hand over either target, you wished to capture the unarmed party. But it was God’s Will to establish the truth by His Words and uproot the disbelievers
8|8|to firmly establish the truth and wipe out falsehood—even to the dismay of the wicked
8|9|˹Remember˺ when you cried out to your Lord for help, He answered, “I will reinforce you with a thousand angels—followed by many others.”
8|10|And God made this a sign of victory and reassurance to your hearts. Victory comes only from God. Surely God is Almighty, All-Wise
8|11|˹Remember˺ when He caused drowsiness to overcome you, giving you serenity. And He sent down rain from the sky to purify you, free you from Satan’s whispers, strengthen your hearts, and make ˹your˺ steps firm
8|12|˹Remember, O Prophet,˺ when your Lord revealed to the angels, “I am with you. So make the believers stand firm. I will cast horror into the hearts of the disbelievers. So strike their necks and strike their fingertips.”
8|13|This is because they defied God and His Messenger. And whoever defies God and His Messenger, then ˹know that˺ God is surely severe in punishment
8|14|That ˹worldly punishment˺ is yours, so taste it! Then the disbelievers will suffer the torment of the Fire
8|15|O believers! When you face the disbelievers in battle, never turn your backs to them
8|16|And whoever does so on such an occasion—unless it is a manoeuvre or to join their own troops—will earn the displeasure of God, and their home will be Hell. What an evil destination
8|17|It was not you ˹believers˺ who killed them, but it was God Who did so. Nor was it you ˹O Prophet˺ who threw ˹a handful of sand at the disbelievers˺, but it was God Who did so, rendering the believers a great favour. Surely God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing
8|18|As such, God frustrates the evil plans of the disbelievers
8|19|If you ˹Meccans˺ sought judgment, now it has come to you. And if you cease, it will be for your own good. But if you persist, We will persist. And your forces—no matter how numerous they might be—will not benefit you whatsoever. For God is certainly with the believers
8|20|O believers! Obey God and His Messenger and do not turn away from him while you hear ˹his call˺
8|21|Do not be like those who say, “We hear,” but in fact they are not listening
8|22|Indeed, the worst of all beings in the sight of God are the ˹wilfully˺ deaf and dumb, who do not understand
8|23|Had God known any goodness in them, He would have certainly made them hear. ˹But˺ even if He had made them hear, they would have surely turned away heedlessly
8|24|O believers! Respond to God and His Messenger when he calls you to that which gives you life. And know that God stands between a person and their heart, and that to Him you will all be gathered
8|25|Beware of a trial that will not only affect the wrongdoers among you. And know that God is severe in punishment
8|26|Remember when you had been vastly outnumbered and oppressed in the land, constantly in fear of attacks by your enemy, then He sheltered you, strengthened you with His help, and provided you with good things so perhaps you would be thankful
8|27|O believers! Do not betray God and the Messenger, nor betray your trusts knowingly
8|28|And know that your wealth and your children are only a test and that with God is a great reward
8|29|O believers! If you are mindful of God, He will grant you a standard ˹to distinguish between right and wrong˺, absolve you of your sins, and forgive you. And God is the Lord of infinite bounty
8|30|And ˹remember, O Prophet,˺ when the disbelievers conspired to capture, kill, or exile you. They planned, but God also planned. And God is the best of planners
8|31|Whenever Our revelations are recited to them, they challenge ˹you˺, “We have already heard ˹the recitation˺. If we wanted, we could have easily produced something similar. This ˹Quran˺ is nothing but ancient fables!”
8|32|And ˹remember˺ when they prayed, “O God! If this is indeed the truth from You, then rain down stones upon us from the sky or overcome us with a painful punishment.”
8|33|But God would never punish them while you ˹O Prophet˺ were in their midst. Nor would He ever punish them if they prayed for forgiveness
8|34|And why should God not punish them while they hinder pilgrims from the Sacred Mosque, claiming to be its rightful guardians? None has the right to guardianship except those mindful ˹of God˺, but most pagans do not know
8|35|Their prayer at the Sacred House was nothing but whistling and clapping. So taste the punishment for your disbelief
8|36|Surely the disbelievers spend their wealth to hinder others from the Path of God. They will continue to spend to the point of regret. Then they will be defeated and the disbelievers will be driven into Hell
8|37|so God may separate the evil from the good. He will pile up the evil ones all together and then cast them into Hell. They are the ˹true˺ losers
8|38|Tell the disbelievers that if they desist, their past will be forgiven. But if they persist, then they have an example in those destroyed before them
8|39|Fight against them until there is no more persecution—and ˹your˺ devotion will be entirely to God. But if they desist, then surely God is All-Seeing of what they do
8|40|And if they do not comply, then know that God is your Protector. What an excellent Protector, and what an excellent Helper
8|41|Know that whatever spoils you take, one-fifth is for God and the Messenger, his close relatives, orphans, the poor, and ˹needy˺ travellers, if you ˹truly˺ believe in God and what We revealed to Our servant on that decisive day when the two armies met ˹at Badr˺. And God is Most Capable of everything
8|42|˹Remember˺ when you were on the near side of the valley, your enemy on the far side, and the caravan was below you. Even if the two armies had made an appointment ˹to meet˺, both would have certainly missed it. Still it transpired so God may establish what He had destined—that those who were to perish and those who were to survive might do so after the truth had been made clear to both. Surely God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing
8|43|˹Remember, O Prophet,˺ when God showed them in your dream as few in number. Had He shown them to you as many, you ˹believers˺ would have certainly faltered and disputed in the matter. But God spared you ˹from that˺. Surely He knows best what is ˹hidden˺ in the heart
8|44|Then when your armies met, God made them appear as few in your eyes, and made you appear as few in theirs, so God may establish what He had destined. And to God ˹all˺ matters will be returned ˹for judgment˺
8|45|O believers! When you face an enemy, stand firm and remember God often so you may triumph
8|46|Obey God and His Messenger and do not dispute with one another, or you would be discouraged and weakened. Persevere! Surely God is with those who persevere
8|47|Do not be like those ˹pagans˺ who left their homes arrogantly, only to be seen by people and to hinder others from God’s Path. And God is Fully Aware of what they do
8|48|And ˹remember˺ when Satan made their ˹evil˺ deeds appealing to them, and said, “No one can overcome you today. I am surely by your side.” But when the two forces faced off, he cowered and said, “I have absolutely nothing to do with you. I certainly see what you do not see. I truly fear God, for God is severe in punishment.”
8|49|˹Remember˺ when the hypocrites and those with sickness in their hearts said, “These ˹believers˺ are deluded by their faith.” But whoever puts their trust in God, surely God is Almighty, All-Wise
8|50|If only you could see when the angels take the souls of the disbelievers, beating their faces and backs, ˹saying,˺ “Taste the torment of burning
8|51|This is ˹the reward˺ for what your hands have done. And God is never unjust to ˹His˺ creation.”
8|52|Their fate is that of the people of Pharaoh and those before them—they all disbelieved in God’s signs, so God seized them for their sins. Indeed, God is All-Powerful, severe in punishment
8|53|This is because God would never discontinue His favour to a people until they discontinue their faith. Surely God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing
8|54|That was the case with Pharaoh’s people and those before them—they all rejected the signs of their Lord, so We destroyed them for their sins and drowned Pharaoh’s people. They were all wrongdoers
8|55|Indeed, the worst of all beings in the sight of God are those who persist in disbelief, never to have faith—
8|56|˹namely˺ those with whom you ˹O Prophet˺ have entered into treaties, but they violate them every time, not fearing the consequences
8|57|If you ever encounter them in battle, make a fearsome example of them, so perhaps those who would follow them may be deterred
8|58|And if you ˹O Prophet˺ see signs of betrayal by a people, respond by openly terminating your treaty with them. Surely God does not like those who betray
8|59|Do not let those disbelievers think they are not within reach. They will have no escape
8|60|Prepare against them what you ˹believers˺ can of ˹military˺ power and cavalry to deter God’s enemies and your enemies as well as other enemies unknown to you but known to God. Whatever you spend in the cause of God will be paid to you in full and you will not be wronged
8|61|If the enemy is inclined towards peace, make peace with them. And put your trust in God. Indeed, He ˹alone˺ is the All-Hearing, All-Knowing
8|62|But if their intention is only to deceive you, then God is certainly sufficient for you. He is the One Who has supported you with His help and with the believers
8|63|He brought their hearts together. Had you spent all the riches in the earth, you could not have united their hearts. But God has united them. Indeed, He is Almighty, All-Wise
8|64|O Prophet! God is sufficient for you and for the believers who follow you
8|65|O Prophet! Motivate the believers to fight. If there are twenty steadfast among you, they will overcome two hundred. And if there are one hundred of you, they will overcome one thousand of the disbelievers, for they are a people who do not comprehend
8|66|Now God has lightened your burden, for He knows that there is weakness in you. So if there are a hundred steadfast among you, they will overcome two hundred. And if there be one thousand, they will overcome two thousand, by God’s Will. And God is with the steadfast
8|67|It is not fit for a prophet that he should take captives until he has thoroughly subdued the land. You ˹believers˺ settled with the fleeting gains of this world, while God’s aim ˹for you˺ is the Hereafter. God is Almighty, All-Wise
8|68|Had it not been for a prior decree from God, you would have certainly been disciplined with a tremendous punishment for whatever ˹ransom˺ you have taken
8|69|Now enjoy what you have taken, for it is lawful and good. And be mindful of God. Surely God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
8|70|O Prophet! Tell the captives in your custody, “If God finds goodness in your hearts, He will give you better than what has been taken from you, and forgive you. For God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful.”
8|71|But if their intention is only to betray you ˹O Prophet˺, they sought to betray God before. But He gave you power over them. And God is All-Knowing, All-Wise
8|72|Those who believed, emigrated, and strived with their wealth and lives in the cause of God, as well as those who gave them shelter and help—they are truly guardians of one another. As for those who believed but did not emigrate, you have no obligations to them until they emigrate. But if they seek your help ˹against persecution˺ in faith, it is your obligation to help them, except against people bound with you in a treaty. God is All-Seeing of what you do
8|73|As for the disbelievers, they are guardians of one another. And unless you ˹believers˺ act likewise, there will be great oppression and corruption in the land
8|74|Those who believed, migrated, and struggled in the cause of God, and those who gave ˹them˺ shelter and help, they are the true believers. They will have forgiveness and an honourable provision
8|75|And those who later believed, migrated, and struggled alongside you, they are also with you. But only blood relatives are now entitled to inherit from one another, as ordained by God. Surely God has ˹full˺ knowledge of everything
9|1|˹This is˺ a discharge from all obligations, by God and His Messenger, to the polytheists you ˹believers˺ have entered into treaties with
9|2|“You ˹polytheists˺ may travel freely through the land for four months, but know that you will have no escape from God, and that God will disgrace the disbelievers.”
9|3|A declaration from God and His Messenger ˹is made˺ to all people on the day of the greater pilgrimage that God and His Messenger are free of the polytheists. So if you ˹pagans˺ repent, it will be better for you. But if you turn away, then know that you will have no escape from God. And give good news ˹O Prophet˺ to the disbelievers of a painful punishment
9|4|As for the polytheists who have honoured every term of their treaty with you and have not supported an enemy against you, honour your treaty with them until the end of its term. Surely God loves those who are mindful ˹of Him˺
9|5|But once the Sacred Months have passed, kill the polytheists ˹who violated their treaties˺ wherever you find them, capture them, besiege them, and lie in wait for them on every way. But if they repent, perform prayers, and pay alms-tax, then set them free. Indeed, God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
9|6|And if anyone from the polytheists asks for your protection ˹O Prophet˺, grant it to them so they may hear the Word of God, then escort them to a place of safety, for they are a people who have no knowledge
9|7|How can such polytheists have a treaty with God and His Messenger, except those you have made a treaty with at the Sacred Mosque? So, as long as they are true to you, be true to them. Indeed God loves those who are mindful ˹of Him˺
9|8|How ˹can they have a treaty˺? If they were to have the upper hand over you, they would have no respect for kinship or treaty. They only flatter you with their tongues, but their hearts are in denial, and most of them are rebellious
9|9|They chose a fleeting gain over God’s revelations, hindering ˹others˺ from His Way. Evil indeed is what they have done
9|10|They do not honour the bonds of kinship or treaties with the believers. It is they who are the transgressors
9|11|But if they repent, perform prayer, and pay alms-tax, then they are your brothers in faith. This is how We make the revelations clear for people of knowledge
9|12|But if they break their oaths after making a pledge and attack your faith, then fight the champions of disbelief—who never honour their oaths—so perhaps they will desist
9|13|Will you not fight those who have broken their oaths, conspired to expel the Messenger ˹from Mecca˺, and attacked you first? Do you fear them? God is more deserving of your fear, if you are ˹true˺ believers
9|14|˹So˺ fight them and God will punish them at your hands, put them to shame, help you overcome them, and soothe the hearts of the believers—
9|15|removing rage from their hearts. And God pardons whoever He wills. For God is All-Knowing, All-Wise
9|16|Do you ˹believers˺ think that you will be left without God proving who among you ˹truly˺ struggles ˹in His cause˺ and never takes trusted allies other than God, His Messenger, or the believers? And God is All-Aware of what you do
9|17|It is not for the polytheists to maintain the mosques of God while they openly profess disbelief. Their deeds are void, and they will be in the Fire forever
9|18|The mosques of God should only be maintained by those who believe in God and the Last Day, establish prayer, pay alms-tax, and fear none but God. It is right to hope that they will be among the ˹truly˺ guided
9|19|Do you ˹pagans˺ consider providing the pilgrims with water and maintaining the Sacred Mosque as equal to believing in God and the Last Day and struggling in the cause of God? They are not equal in God’s sight. And God does not guide the wrongdoing people
9|20|Those who have believed, emigrated, and strived in the cause of God with their wealth and their lives are greater in rank in the sight of God. It is they who will triumph
9|21|Their Lord gives them good news of His mercy, pleasure, and Gardens with everlasting bliss
9|22|to stay there for ever and ever. Surely with God is a great reward
9|23|O believers! Do not take your parents and siblings as trusted allies if they choose disbelief over belief. And whoever of you does so, they are the ˹true˺ wrongdoers
9|24|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “If your parents and children and siblings and spouses and extended family and the wealth you have acquired and the trade you fear will decline and the homes you cherish—˹if all these˺ are more beloved to you than God and His Messenger and struggling in His Way, then wait until God brings about His Will. God does not guide the rebellious people.”
9|25|Indeed God has given you ˹believers˺ victory on many battlefields, even at the Battle of Ḥunain when you took pride in your great numbers, but they proved of no advantage to you. The earth, despite its vastness, seemed to close in on you, then you turned back in retreat
9|26|Then God sent down His reassurance upon His Messenger and the believers, and sent down forces you could not see, and punished those who disbelieved. Such was the reward of the disbelievers
9|27|Then afterwards God will turn in grace to whoever He wills. And God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
9|28|O believers! Indeed, the polytheists are ˹spiritually˺ impure, so they should not approach the Sacred Mosque after this year. If you fear poverty, God will enrich you out of His bounty, if He wills. Surely, God is All-Knowing, All-Wise
9|29|Fight those who do not believe in God and the Last Day, nor comply with what God and His Messenger have forbidden, nor embrace the religion of truth from among those who were given the Scripture, until they pay the tax, willingly submitting, fully humbled
9|30|The Jews say, “Ezra is the son of God,” while the Christians say, “The Messiah is the son of God.” Such are their baseless assertions, only parroting the words of earlier disbelievers. May God condemn them! How can they be deluded ˹from the truth˺
9|31|They have taken their rabbis and monks as well as the Messiah, son of Mary, as lords besides God, even though they were commanded to worship none but One God. There is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him. Glorified is He above what they associate ˹with Him˺
9|32|They wish to extinguish God’s light with their mouths, but God will only allow His light to be perfected, even to the dismay of the disbelievers
9|33|He is the One Who has sent His Messenger with ˹true˺ guidance and the religion of truth, making it prevail over all others, even to the dismay of the polytheists
9|34|O believers! Indeed, many rabbis and monks consume people’s wealth wrongfully and hinder ˹others˺ from the Way of God. Give good news of a painful torment to those who hoard gold and silver and do not spend it in God’s cause
9|35|The Day ˹will come˺ when their treasure will be heated up in the Fire of Hell, and their foreheads, sides, and backs branded with it. ˹It will be said to them,˺ “This is the treasure you hoarded for yourselves. Now taste what you hoarded!”
9|36|Indeed, the number of months ordained by God is twelve—in God’s Record since the day He created the heavens and the earth—of which four are sacred. That is the Right Way. So do not wrong one another during these months. And together fight the polytheists as they fight against you together. And know that God is with those mindful ˹of Him˺
9|37|Reallocating the sanctity of ˹these˺ months is an increase in disbelief, by which the disbelievers are led ˹far˺ astray. They adjust the sanctity one year and uphold it in another, only to maintain the number of months sanctified by God, violating the very months God has made sacred. Their evil deeds have been made appealing to them. And God does not guide the disbelieving people
9|38|O believers! What is the matter with you that when you are asked to march forth in the cause of God, you cling firmly to ˹your˺ land? Do you prefer the life of this world over the Hereafter? The enjoyment of this worldly life is insignificant compared to that of the Hereafter
9|39|If you do not march forth, He will afflict you with a painful torment and replace you with other people. You are not harming Him in the least. And God is Most Capable of everything
9|40|˹It does not matter˺ if you ˹believers˺ do not support him, for God did in fact support him when the disbelievers drove him out ˹of Mecca˺ and he was only one of two. While they both were in the cave, he reassured his companion, “Do not worry; God is certainly with us.” So God sent down His serenity upon the Prophet, supported him with forces you ˹believers˺ did not see, and made the word of the disbelievers lowest, while the Word of God is supreme. And God is Almighty, All-Wise
9|41|˹O believers!˺ March forth whether it is easy or difficult for you, and strive with your wealth and your lives in the cause of God. That is best for you, if only you knew
9|42|Had the gain been within reach and the journey shorter, they would have followed you, but the distance seemed too long for them. And they will swear by God, “Had we been able, we would have certainly joined you.” They are ruining themselves. And God knows that they are surely lying
9|43|May God pardon you ˹O Prophet˺! Why did you give them permission ˹to stay behind˺ before those who told the truth were distinguished from those who were lying
9|44|Those who believe in God and the Last Day do not ask for exemption from striving with their wealth and their lives. And God has perfect knowledge of those who are mindful ˹of Him˺
9|45|No one would ask for exemption except those who have no faith in God or the Last Day, and whose hearts are in doubt, so they are torn by their doubts
9|46|Had they ˹really˺ intended to march forth, they would have made preparations for it. But God disliked that they should go, so He let them lag behind, and it was said ˹to them˺, “Stay with those ˹helpless˺ who remain behind.”
9|47|Had they gone forth with you ˹believers˺, they would have been nothing but trouble for you, and would have scrambled around, seeking to spread discord in your midst. And some of you would have eagerly listened to them. And God has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of the wrongdoers
9|48|They had already sought to spread discord before and devised every ˹possible˺ plot against you ˹O Prophet˺, until the truth came and God’s Will prevailed—much to their dismay
9|49|There are some of them who say, “Exempt me and do not expose me to temptation.” They have already fallen into temptation. And Hell will surely engulf the disbelievers
9|50|If a blessing befalls you ˹O Prophet˺, they grieve, but if a disaster befalls you, they say, “We took our precaution in advance,” and turn away, rejoicing
9|51|Say, “Nothing will ever befall us except what God has destined for us. He is our Protector.” So in God let the believers put their trust
9|52|Say, “Are you awaiting anything to befall us except one of the two best things: ˹victory or martyrdom˺? But We are awaiting God to afflict you with torment either from Him or at our hands. So keep waiting! We too are waiting with you.”
9|53|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “˹Whether you˺ donate willingly or unwillingly, it will never be accepted from you, for you have been a rebellious people.”
9|54|And what prevented their donations from being accepted is that they have lost faith in God and His Messenger, they never come to prayer except half-heartedly, and they never donate except resentfully
9|55|So let neither their wealth nor children impress you ˹O Prophet˺. God only intends to torment them through these things in this worldly life, then their souls will depart while they are disbelievers
9|56|They swear by God that they are part of you, but they are not. They only say so out of fear
9|57|If only they could find a refuge, or a cave, or any hiding-place, they would rush headlong towards it
9|58|There are some of them who are critical of your distribution of alms ˹O Prophet˺. If they are given some of it they are pleased, but if not they are enraged
9|59|If only they had been content with what God and His Messenger had given them and said, “God is sufficient for us! God will grant us out of His bounty, and so will His Messenger. To God ˹alone˺ we turn with hope.”
9|60|Alms-tax is only for the poor and the needy, for those employed to administer it, for those whose hearts are attracted ˹to the faith˺, for ˹freeing˺ slaves, for those in debt, for God’s cause, and for ˹needy˺ travellers. ˹This is˺ an obligation from God. And God is All-Knowing, All-Wise
9|61|And there are others who hurt the Prophet by saying, “He listens to anyone.” Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “He listens to what is best for you. He believes in God, has faith in the believers, and is a mercy for those who believe among you.” Those who hurt God’s Messenger will suffer a painful punishment
9|62|They swear by God to you ˹believers˺ in order to please you, while it is the pleasure of God and His Messenger they should seek, if they are ˹true˺ believers
9|63|Do they not know that whoever opposes God and His Messenger will be in the Fire of Hell forever? That is the ultimate disgrace
9|64|The hypocrites fear that a sûrah should be revealed about them, exposing what is in their hearts. Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Keep mocking! God will definitely bring to light what you fear.”
9|65|If you question them, they will certainly say, “We were only talking idly and joking around.” Say, “Was it God, His revelations, and His Messenger that you ridiculed?”
9|66|Make no excuses! You have lost faith after your belief. If We pardon a group of you, We will punish others for their wickedness
9|67|The hypocrites, both men and women, are all alike: they encourage what is evil, forbid what is good, and withhold ˹what is in˺ their hands. They neglected God, so He neglected them. Surely the hypocrites are the rebellious
9|68|God has promised the hypocrites, both men and women, and the disbelievers an everlasting stay in the Fire of Hell—it is sufficient for them. God has condemned them, and they will suffer a never-ending punishment
9|69|˹You hypocrites are˺ like those ˹disbelievers˺ before you. They were far superior to you in might and more abundant in wealth and children. They enjoyed their share in this life. You have enjoyed your share, just as they did. And you have engaged in idle talk, just as they did. Their deeds have become void in this world and the Hereafter. And it is they who are the ˹true˺ losers
9|70|Have they not received the stories of those ˹destroyed˺ before them: the people of Noah, ’Âd, and Thamûd, the people of Abraham, the residents of Midian, and the overturned cities ˹of Lot˺? Their messengers came to them with clear proofs. God would have never wronged them, but it was they who wronged themselves
9|71|The believers, both men and women, are guardians of one another. They encourage good and forbid evil, establish prayer and pay alms-tax, and obey God and His Messenger. It is they who will be shown God’s mercy. Surely God is Almighty, All-Wise
9|72|God has promised the believers, both men and women, Gardens under which rivers flow, to stay there forever, and splendid homes in the Gardens of Eternity, and—above all—the pleasure of God. That is ˹truly˺ the ultimate triumph
9|73|O Prophet! Struggle against the disbelievers and the hypocrites, and be firm with them. Hell will be their home. What an evil destination
9|74|They swear by God that they never said anything ˹blasphemous˺, while they did in fact utter a blasphemy, lost faith after accepting Islam, and plotted what they could not carry out. It is only through resentment that they pay God and His Messenger back for enriching them out of His bounty! If they repent, it will be better for them. But if they turn away, God will torment them with a painful punishment in this world and the Hereafter, and they will have no one on earth to protect or help them
9|75|And there are some who had made a vow to God: “If He gives us from His bounty, we will surely spend in charity and be of the righteous.”
9|76|But when He gave them out of His bounty, they withheld it and turned away indifferently
9|77|So He caused hypocrisy to plague their hearts until the Day they will meet Him, for breaking their promise to God and for their lies
9|78|Do they not know that God ˹fully˺ knows their ˹evil˺ thoughts and secret talks, and that God is the Knower of all unseen
9|79|˹There are˺ those who slander ˹some of˺ the believers for donating liberally and mock others for giving only the little they can afford. God will throw their mockery back at them, and they will suffer a painful punishment
9|80|˹It does not matter˺ whether you ˹O Prophet˺ pray for them to be forgiven or not. Even if you pray for their forgiveness seventy times, God will never forgive them. That is because they have lost faith in God and His Messenger. And God does not guide the rebellious people
9|81|Those ˹hypocrites˺ who remained behind rejoiced for doing so in defiance of the Messenger of God and hated ˹the prospect of˺ striving with their wealth and their lives in the cause of God. They said ˹to one another˺, “Do not march forth in the heat.” Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “The Fire of Hell is far hotter!” If only they could comprehend
9|82|So let them laugh a little—they will weep much as a reward for what they have committed
9|83|If God returns you ˹O Prophet˺ to a group of them and they ask to go forth with you, say, “You will not ever go forth or fight an enemy along with me. You preferred to stay behind the first time, so stay with those ˹helpless˺ who remain behind.”
9|84|And do not ever offer ˹funeral˺ prayers for any of their dead, nor stand by their grave ˹at burial˺, for they have lost faith in God and His Messenger and died rebellious
9|85|And let neither their wealth nor children impress you ˹O Prophet˺. God only intends to torment them through these things in this world, and ˹then˺ their souls will depart while they are disbelievers
9|86|Whenever a sûrah is revealed stating, “Believe in God and struggle along with His Messenger,” the rich among them would ask to be exempt, saying, “Leave us with those who remain behind.”
9|87|They preferred to stay behind with the helpless, and their hearts have been sealed so they do not comprehend
9|88|But the Messenger and the believers with him strived with their wealth and their lives. They will have all the best, and it is they who will be successful
9|89|God has prepared for them Gardens under which rivers flow, to stay there forever. That is the ultimate triumph
9|90|Some nomadic Arabs ˹also˺ came with excuses, seeking exemption. And those who were untrue to God and His Messenger remained behind ˹with no excuse˺. The unfaithful among them will be afflicted with a painful punishment
9|91|There is no blame on the weak, the sick, or those lacking the means ˹if they stay behind˺, as long as they are true to God and His Messenger. There is no blame on the good-doers. And God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
9|92|Nor ˹is there any blame on˺ those who came to you ˹O Prophet˺ for mounts, then when you said, “I can find no mounts for you,” they left with eyes overflowing with tears out of grief that they had nothing to contribute
9|93|Blame is only on those who seek exemption from you although they have the means. They preferred to stay behind with the helpless, and God has sealed their hearts so they do not realize ˹the consequences˺
9|94|They will make excuses to you ˹believers˺ when you return to them. Say, “Make no excuses, ˹for˺ we will not believe you. God has already informed us about your ˹true˺ state ˹of faith˺. Your ˹future˺ deeds will be observed by God and His Messenger as well. And you will be returned to the Knower of the seen and unseen, then He will inform you of what you used to do.”
9|95|When you return, they will swear to you by God so that you may leave them alone. So leave them alone—they are truly evil. Hell will be their home as a reward for what they have committed
9|96|They will swear to you in order to please you. And even if you are pleased with them, God will never be pleased with the rebellious people
9|97|The nomadic Arabs ˹around Medina˺ are far worse in disbelief and hypocrisy, and less likely to know the laws revealed by God to His Messenger. And God is All-Knowing, All-Wise
9|98|And among the nomads are those who consider what they donate to be a loss and await your misfortune. May ill-fortune befall them! And God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing
9|99|However, among the nomadic Arabs are those who believe in God and the Last Day, and consider what they donate as a means of coming closer to God and ˹receiving˺ the prayers of the Messenger. It will certainly bring them closer. God will admit them into His mercy. Surely God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
9|100|As for the foremost—the first of the Emigrants and the Helpers—and those who follow them in goodness, God is pleased with them and they are pleased with Him. And He has prepared for them Gardens under which rivers flow, to stay there for ever and ever. That is the ultimate triumph
9|101|Some of the nomads around you ˹believers˺ are hypocrites, as are some of the people of Medina. They have mastered hypocrisy. They are not known to you ˹O Prophet˺; they are known to Us. We will punish them twice ˹in this world˺, then they will be brought back ˹to their Lord˺ for a tremendous punishment
9|102|Some others have confessed their wrongdoing: they have mixed goodness with evil. It is right to hope that God will turn to them in mercy. Surely God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
9|103|Take from their wealth ˹O Prophet˺ charity to purify and bless them, and pray for them—surely your prayer is a source of comfort for them. And God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing
9|104|Do they not know that God alone accepts the repentance of His servants and receives ˹their˺ charity, and that God alone is the Accepter of Repentance, Most Merciful
9|105|Tell ˹them, O Prophet˺, “Do as you will. Your deeds will be observed by God, His Messenger, and the believers. And you will be returned to the Knower of the seen and unseen, then He will inform you of what you used to do.”
9|106|And some others are left for God’s decision, either to punish them or turn to them in mercy. And God is All-Knowing, All-Wise
9|107|There are also those ˹hypocrites˺ who set up a mosque ˹only˺ to cause harm, promote disbelief, divide the believers, and as a base for those who had previously fought against God and His Messenger. They will definitely swear, “We intended nothing but good,” but God bears witness that they are surely liars
9|108|Do not ˹O Prophet˺ ever pray in it. Certainly, a mosque founded on righteousness from the first day is more worthy of your prayers. In it are men who love to be purified. And God loves those who purify themselves
9|109|Which is better: those who laid the foundation of their building on the fear and pleasure of God, or those who did so on the edge of a crumbling cliff that tumbled down with them into the Fire of Hell? And God does not guide the wrongdoing people
9|110|The building which they erected will never cease to fuel hypocrisy in their hearts until their hearts are torn apart. And God is All-Knowing, All-Wise
9|111|God has indeed purchased from the believers their lives and wealth in exchange for Paradise. They fight in the cause of God and kill or are killed. This is a true promise binding on Him in the Torah, the Gospel, and the Quran. And whose promise is truer than God’s? So rejoice in the exchange you have made with Him. That is ˹truly˺ the ultimate triumph
9|112|˹It is the believers˺ who repent, who are devoted to worship, who praise ˹their Lord˺, who fast, who bow down and prostrate themselves, who encourage good and forbid evil, and who observe the limits set by God. And give good news to the believers
9|113|It is not ˹proper˺ for the Prophet and the believers to seek forgiveness for the polytheists, even if they were close relatives, after it has become clear to the believers that they are bound for the Hellfire
9|114|As for Abraham’s prayer for his father’s forgiveness, it was only in fulfilment of a promise he had made to him. But when it became clear to Abraham that his father was an enemy of God, he broke ties with him. Abraham was truly tender-hearted, forbearing
9|115|God would never consider a people deviant after He has guided them, until He makes clear to them what they must avoid. Surely God has ˹full˺ knowledge of everything
9|116|Indeed, to God ˹alone˺ belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He gives life and causes death. And besides God you have no guardian or helper
9|117|God has certainly turned in mercy to the Prophet as well as the Emigrants and the Helpers who stood by him in the time of hardship, after the hearts of a group of them had almost faltered. He then accepted their repentance. Surely He is Ever Gracious and Most Merciful to them
9|118|And ˹God has also turned in mercy to˺ the three who had remained behind, ˹whose guilt distressed them˺ until the earth, despite its vastness, seemed to close in on them, and their souls were torn in anguish. They knew there was no refuge from God except in Him. Then He turned to them in mercy so that they might repent. Surely God ˹alone˺ is the Accepter of Repentance, Most Merciful
9|119|O believers! Be mindful of God and be with the truthful
9|120|It was not ˹proper˺ for the people of Medina and the nomadic Arabs around them to avoid marching with the Messenger of God or to prefer their own lives above his. That is because whenever they suffer from thirst, fatigue, or hunger in the cause of God; or tread on a territory, unnerving the disbelievers; or inflict any loss on an enemy—it is written to their credit as a good deed. Surely God never discounts the reward of the good-doers
9|121|And whenever they make a donation, small or large, or cross a valley ˹in God’s cause˺—it is written to their credit, so that God may grant them the best reward for what they used to do
9|122|˹However,˺ it is not necessary for the believers to march forth all at once. Only a party from each group should march forth, leaving the rest to gain religious knowledge then enlighten their people when they return to them, so that they ˹too˺ may beware ˹of evil˺
9|123|O believers! Fight the disbelievers around you and let them find firmness in you. And know that God is with those mindful ˹of Him˺
9|124|Whenever a sûrah is revealed, some of them ask ˹mockingly˺, “Which of you has this increased in faith?” As for the believers, it has increased them in faith and they rejoice
9|125|But as for those with sickness in their hearts, it has increased them only in wickedness upon their wickedness, and they die as disbelievers
9|126|Do they not see that they are tried once or twice every year? Yet they neither repent nor do they learn a lesson
9|127|Whenever a sûrah is revealed, they look at one another, ˹saying,˺ “Is anyone watching you?” Then they slip away. ˹It is˺ God ˹Who˺ has turned their hearts away because they are a people who do not comprehend
9|128|There certainly has come to you a messenger from among yourselves. He is concerned by your suffering, anxious for your well-being, and gracious and merciful to the believers
9|129|But if they turn away, then say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “God is sufficient for me. There is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him. In Him I put my trust. And He is the Lord of the Mighty Throne.”
10|1|Alif-Lãm-Ra. These are the verses of the Book, rich in wisdom
10|2|Is it astonishing to people that We have sent revelation to a man from among themselves, ˹instructing him,˺ “Warn humanity and give good news to the believers that they will have an honourable status with their Lord.”? Yet the disbelievers said, “Indeed, this ˹man˺ is clearly a magician!”
10|3|Surely your Lord is God Who created the heavens and the earth in six Days, then established Himself on the Throne, conducting every affair. None can intercede except by His permission. That is God—your Lord, so worship Him ˹alone˺. Will you not then be mindful
10|4|To Him is your return all together. God’s promise is ˹always˺ true. Indeed, He originates the creation then resurrects it so that He may justly reward those who believe and do good. But those who disbelieve will have a boiling drink and a painful punishment for their disbelief
10|5|He is the One Who made the sun a radiant source and the moon a reflected light, with precisely ordained phases, so that you may know the number of years and calculation ˹of time˺. God did not create all this except for a purpose. He makes the signs clear for people of knowledge
10|6|Surely in the alternation of the day and the night, and in all that God has created in the heavens and the earth, there are truly signs for those mindful ˹of Him˺
10|7|Indeed, those who do not expect to meet Us, being pleased and content with this worldly life, and who are heedless of Our signs
10|8|they will have the Fire as a home because of what they have committed
10|9|Surely those who believe and do good, their Lord will guide them ˹to Paradise˺ through their faith, rivers will flow under their feet in the Gardens of Bliss
10|10|in which their prayer will be, “Glory be to You, O God!” and their greeting will be, “Peace!” and their closing prayer will be, “All praise is for God—Lord of all worlds!”
10|11|If God were to hasten evil for people as they wish to hasten good, they would have certainly been doomed. But We leave those who do not expect to meet Us to wander blindly in their defiance
10|12|Whenever someone is touched by hardship, they cry out to Us, whether lying on their side, sitting, or standing. But when We relieve their hardship, they return to their old ways as if they had never cried to Us to remove any hardship! This is how the misdeeds of the transgressors have been made appealing to them
10|13|We surely destroyed ˹other˺ peoples before you when they did wrong, and their messengers came to them with clear proofs but they would not believe! This is how We reward the wicked people
10|14|Then We made you their successors in the land to see how you would act
10|15|When Our clear revelations are recited to them, those who do not expect to meet Us say ˹to the Prophet˺, “Bring us a different Quran or make some changes in it.” Say ˹to them˺, “It is not for me to change it on my own. I only follow what is revealed to me. I fear, if I were to disobey my Lord, the punishment of a tremendous Day.”
10|16|Say, “Had God willed, I would not have recited it to you, nor would He have made it known to you. I had lived my whole life among you before this ˹revelation˺. Do you not understand?”
10|17|Who does more wrong than those who fabricate lies against God or deny His revelations? Indeed, the wicked will never succeed
10|18|They worship besides God others who can neither harm nor benefit them, and say, “These are our intercessors with God.” Ask ˹them, O Prophet˺, “Are you informing God of something He does not know in the heavens or the earth? Glorified and Exalted is He above what they associate ˹with Him˺!”
10|19|Humanity was once nothing but a single community ˹of believers˺, but then they differed. Had it not been for a prior decree from your Lord, their differences would have been settled ˹at once˺
10|20|They ask, “Why has no ˹other˺ sign been sent down to him from his Lord?” Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “˹The knowledge of˺ the unseen is with God alone. So wait! I too am waiting with you.”
10|21|When We give people a taste of mercy after being afflicted with a hardship, they swiftly devise plots against Our revelations! Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “God is swifter in devising ˹punishment˺. Surely Our messenger-angels record whatever you devise.”
10|22|He is the One Who enables you to travel through land and sea. And it so happens that you are on ships, sailing with a favourable wind, to the passengers’ delight. Suddenly, the ships are overcome by a gale wind and those on board are overwhelmed by waves from every side, and they assume they are doomed. They cry out to God ˹alone˺ in sincere devotion, “If You save us from this, we will certainly be grateful.”
10|23|But as soon as He rescues them, they transgress in the land unjustly. O humanity! Your transgression is only against your own souls. ˹There is only˺ brief enjoyment in this worldly life, then to Us is your return, and then We will inform you of what you used to do
10|24|The life of this world is just like rain We send down from the sky, producing a mixture of plants which humans and animals consume. Then just as the earth looks its best, perfectly beautified, and its people think they have full control over it, there comes to it Our command by night or by day, so We mow it down as if it never flourished yesterday! This is how We make the signs clear for people who reflect
10|25|And God invites ˹all˺ to the Home of Peace and guides whoever He wills to the Straight Path
10|26|Those who do good will have the finest reward and ˹even˺ more. Neither gloom nor disgrace will cover their faces. It is they who will be the residents of Paradise. They will be there forever
10|27|As for those who commit evil, the reward of an evil deed is its equivalent. Humiliation will cover them—with no one to protect them from God—as if their faces were covered with patches of the night’s deep darkness. It is they who will be the residents of the Fire. They will be there forever
10|28|˹Consider˺ the Day We will gather them all together then say to those who associated others ˹with God in worship˺, “Stay in your places—you and your associate-gods.” We will separate them from each other, and their associate-gods will say, “It was not us that you worshipped
10|29|God is sufficient as a Witness between each of us that we were totally unaware of your worship.”
10|30|Then and there every soul will face ˹the consequences of˺ what it had done. They all will be returned to God—their True Master. And whatever ˹gods˺ they fabricated will fail them
10|31|Ask ˹them, O Prophet˺, “Who provides for you from heaven and earth? Who owns ˹your˺ hearing and sight? Who brings forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living? And who conducts every affair?” They will ˹surely˺ say, “God.” Say, “Will you not then fear ˹Him˺
10|32|That is God—your True Lord. So what is beyond the truth except falsehood? How can you then be turned away?”
10|33|And so your Lord’s decree has been proven true against the rebellious—that they will never believe
10|34|Ask ˹them, O Prophet˺, “Can any of your associate-gods originate creation and then resurrect it?” Say, “˹Only˺ God originates creation and then resurrects it. How can you then be deluded ˹from the truth˺?”
10|35|Ask ˹them, O Prophet˺, “Can any of your associate-gods guide to the truth?” Say, “˹Only˺ God guides to the truth.” Who then is more worthy to be followed: the One Who guides to the truth or those who cannot find the way unless guided? What is the matter with you? How do you judge
10|36|Most of them follow nothing but ˹inherited˺ assumptions. ˹And˺ surely assumptions can in no way replace the truth. God is indeed All-Knowing of what they do
10|37|It is not ˹possible˺ for this Quran to have been produced by anyone other than God. In fact, it is a confirmation of what came before, and an explanation of the Scripture. It is, without a doubt, from the Lord of all worlds
10|38|Or do they claim, “He made it up!”? Tell them ˹O Prophet˺, “Produce one sûrah like it then, and seek help from whoever you can—other than God—if what you say is true!”
10|39|In fact, they ˹hastily˺ rejected the Book without comprehending it and before the fulfilment of its warnings. Similarly, those before them were in denial. See then what was the end of the wrongdoers
10|40|Some of them will ˹eventually˺ believe in it; others will not. And your Lord knows best the corruptors
10|41|If they deny you, then say, “My deeds are mine and your deeds are yours. You are free of what I do and I am free of what you do!”
10|42|Some of them listen to what you say, but can you make the deaf hear even though they do not understand
10|43|And some of them look at you, but can you guide the blind even though they cannot see
10|44|Indeed, God does not wrong people in the least, but it is people who wrong themselves
10|45|On the Day He will gather them, it will be as if they had not stayed ˹in the world˺ except for an hour of a day, ˹as though they were only˺ getting to know one another. Lost indeed will be those who denied the meeting with God, and were not ˹rightly˺ guided
10|46|Whether We show you ˹O Prophet˺ some of what We threaten them with, or cause you to die ˹before that˺, to Us is their return and God is a Witness over what they do
10|47|And for every community there is a messenger. After their messenger has come, judgment is passed on them in all fairness, and they are not wronged
10|48|They ask ˹the believers˺, “When will this threat come to pass if what you say is true?”
10|49|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “I have no power to benefit or protect myself, except by the Will of God.” For each community there is an appointed term. When their time arrives, they cannot delay it for a moment, nor could they advance it
10|50|Tell them ˹O Prophet˺, “Imagine if His torment were to overcome you by night or day—do the wicked realize what they are ˹really˺ asking Him to hasten
10|51|Will you believe in it only after it has overtaken you? Now? But you always wanted to hasten it!”
10|52|Then the wrongdoers will be told, “Taste the torment of eternity! Are you not rewarded except for what you used to commit?”
10|53|They ask you ˹O Prophet˺, “Is this true?” Say, “Yes, by my Lord! Most certainly it is true! And you will have no escape.”
10|54|If every wrongdoer were to possess everything in the world, they would surely ransom themselves with it. They will hide ˹their˺ remorse when they see the torment. And they will be judged in all fairness, and none will be wronged
10|55|Surely to God belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth. Surely God’s promise is ˹always˺ true, but most of them do not know
10|56|He ˹is the One Who˺ gives life and causes death, and to Him you will ˹all˺ be returned
10|57|O humanity! Indeed, there has come to you a warning from your Lord, a cure for what is in the hearts, a guide, and a mercy for the believers
10|58|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “In God’s grace and mercy let them rejoice. That is far better than whatever ˹wealth˺ they amass.”
10|59|Ask ˹the pagans, O Prophet˺, “Have you seen that which God has sent down for you as a provision, of which you have made some lawful and some unlawful?” Say, “Has God given you authorization, or are you fabricating lies against God?”
10|60|What do those who fabricate lies against God expect on Judgment Day? Surely God is ever Bountiful to humanity, but most of them are ungrateful
10|61|There is no activity you may be engaged in ˹O Prophet˺ or portion of the Quran you may be reciting, nor any deed you ˹all˺ may be doing except that We are a Witness over you while doing it. Not ˹even˺ an atom’s weight is hidden from your Lord on earth or in heaven; nor anything smaller or larger than that, but is ˹written˺ in a perfect Record
10|62|There will certainly be no fear for the close servants of God, nor will they grieve
10|63|˹They are˺ those who are faithful and are mindful ˹of Him˺
10|64|For them is good news in this worldly life and the Hereafter. There is no change in the promise of God. That is ˹truly˺ the ultimate triumph
10|65|Do not let their words grieve you ˹O Prophet˺. Surely all honour and power belongs to God. He is the All-Hearing, All-Knowing
10|66|Certainly to God ˹alone˺ belong all those in the heavens and all those on the earth. And what do those who associate others with God really follow? They follow nothing but assumptions and do nothing but lie
10|67|He is the One Who has made the night for you to rest in and the day bright. Surely in this are signs for people who listen
10|68|They say, “God has offspring.” Glory be to Him! He is the Self-Sufficient. To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. You have no proof of this! Do you say about God what you do not know
10|69|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Indeed, those who fabricate lies against God will never succeed.”
10|70|˹It is only˺ a brief enjoyment in this world, then to Us is their return, then We will make them taste the severe punishment for their disbelief
10|71|Relate to them ˹O Prophet˺ the story of Noah when he said to his people, “O my People! If my presence and my reminders to you of God’s signs are unbearable to you, then ˹know that˺ I have put my trust in God. So devise a plot along with your associate-gods—and you do not have to be secretive about your plot—then carry it out against me without delay
10|72|And if you turn away, ˹remember˺ I have never demanded a reward from you ˹for delivering the message˺. My reward is only from God. And I have been commanded to be one of those who submit ˹to God˺.”
10|73|But they still rejected him, so We saved him and those with him in the Ark and made them successors, and drowned those who rejected Our signs. See then what was the end of those who had been warned
10|74|Then after him We sent ˹other˺ messengers to their ˹own˺ people and they came to them with clear proofs. But they would not believe in what they had rejected before. This is how We seal the hearts of the transgressors
10|75|Then after these ˹messengers˺ We sent Moses and Aaron to Pharaoh and his chiefs with Our signs. But they behaved arrogantly and were a wicked people
10|76|When the truth came to them from Us, they said, “This is certainly pure magic!”
10|77|Moses responded, “Is this what you say about the truth when it has come to you? Is this magic? Magicians will never succeed.”
10|78|They argued, “Have you come to turn us away from the faith of our forefathers so that the two of you may become supreme in the land? We will never believe in you!”
10|79|Pharaoh demanded, “Bring me every skilled magician.”
10|80|When the magicians came, Moses said to them, “Cast whatever you wish to cast!”
10|81|When they did, Moses said, “What you have produced is mere magic, God will surely make it useless, for God certainly does not set right the work of the corruptors
10|82|And God establishes the truth by His Words—even to the dismay of the wicked.”
10|83|But no one believed in Moses except a few youths of his people, while fearing that Pharaoh and their own chiefs might persecute them. And certainly Pharaoh was a tyrant in the land, and he was truly a transgressor
10|84|Moses said, “O my people! If you do believe in God and submit ˹to His Will˺, then put your trust in Him.”
10|85|They replied, “In God we trust. Our Lord! Do not subject us to the persecution of the oppressive people
10|86|and deliver us by Your mercy from the disbelieving people.”
10|87|We revealed to Moses and his brother, “Appoint houses for your people in Egypt. Turn these houses into places of worship, establish prayer, and give good news to the believers!”
10|88|Moses prayed, “Our Lord! You have granted Pharaoh and his chiefs luxuries and riches in this worldly life, ˹which they abused˺ to lead people astray from Your Way! Our Lord, destroy their riches and harden their hearts so that they will not believe until they see the painful punishment.”
10|89|God responded ˹to Moses and Aaron˺, “Your prayer is answered! So be steadfast and do not follow the way of those who do not know.”
10|90|We brought the Children of Israel across the sea. Then Pharaoh and his soldiers pursued them unjustly and oppressively. But as Pharaoh was drowning, he cried out, “I believe that there is no god except that in whom the Children of Israel believe, and I am ˹now˺ one of those who submit.”
10|91|˹He was told,˺ “Now ˹you believe˺? But you always disobeyed and were one of the corruptors
10|92|Today We will preserve your corpse so that you may become an example for those who come after you. And surely most people are heedless of Our examples!”
10|93|Indeed, We settled the Children of Israel in a blessed land, and granted them good, lawful provisions. They did not differ until knowledge came to them. Surely your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Judgment regarding their differences
10|94|If you ˹O Prophet˺ are in doubt about ˹these stories˺ that We have revealed to you, then ask those who read the Scripture before you. The truth has certainly come to you from your Lord, so do not be one of those who doubt
10|95|and do not be one of those who deny God’s signs or you will be one of the losers
10|96|Indeed, those against whom God’s decree ˹of torment˺ is justified will not believe—
10|97|even if every sign were to come to them—until they see the painful punishment
10|98|If only there had been a society which believed ˹before seeing the torment˺ and, therefore, benefited from its belief, like the people of Jonah. When they believed, We lifted from them the torment of disgrace in this world and allowed them enjoyment for a while
10|99|Had your Lord so willed ˹O Prophet˺, all ˹people˺ on earth would have certainly believed, every single one of them! Would you then force people to become believers
10|100|It is not for any soul to believe except by God’s leave, and He will bring His wrath upon those who are unmindful
10|101|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Consider all that is in the heavens and the earth!” Yet neither signs nor warners are of any benefit to those who refuse to believe
10|102|Are they waiting for ˹anything˺ except the same torments that befell those before them? Say, “Keep waiting then! I too am waiting with you.”
10|103|Then We saved Our messengers and those who believed. For it is Our duty to save the believers
10|104|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “O humanity! If you are in doubt of my faith, then ˹know that˺ I do not worship those ˹idols˺ you worship instead of God. But I worship God, Who has the power to cause your death. And I have been commanded, ‘Be one of the believers,’
10|105|and, ‘Be steadfast in faith in all uprightness, and do not be one of the polytheists,’
10|106|and ‘Do not invoke, instead of God, what can neither benefit nor harm you—for if you do, then you will certainly be one of the wrongdoers,’
10|107|and ‘If God touches you with harm, none can undo it except Him. And if He intends good for you, none can withhold His bounty. He grants it to whoever He wills of His servants. And He is the All-Forgiving, Most Merciful.’”
10|108|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “O humanity! The truth has surely come to you from your Lord. So whoever chooses to be guided, it is only for their own good. And whoever chooses to stray, it is only to their own loss. And I am not a keeper over you.”
10|109|And follow what is revealed to you, and be patient until God passes His judgment. For He is the Best of Judges
11|1|Alif-Lãm-Ra. ˹This is˺ a Book whose verses are well perfected and then fully explained. ˹It is˺ from the One ˹Who is˺ All-Wise, All-Aware
11|2|˹Tell them, O Prophet,˺ “Worship none but God. Surely I am a warner and deliverer of good news to you from Him
11|3|And seek your Lord’s forgiveness and turn to Him in repentance. He will grant you a good provision for an appointed term and graciously reward the doers of good. But if you turn away, then I truly fear for you the torment of a formidable Day
11|4|To God is your return. And He is Most Capable of everything.”
11|5|Indeed, they enfold ˹what is in˺ their hearts, ˹trying˺ to hide it from Him! But even when they cover themselves with their clothes, He knows what they conceal and what they reveal. Surely He knows best what is ˹hidden˺ in the heart
11|6|There is no moving creature on earth whose provision is not guaranteed by God. And He knows where it lives and where it is laid to rest. All is ˹written˺ in a perfect Record
11|7|He is the One Who created the heavens and the earth in six Days—and His Throne was upon the waters—in order to test which of you is best in deeds. And if you ˹O Prophet˺ say, “Surely you will ˹all˺ be raised up after death,” the disbelievers will certainly say, “That is nothing but pure magic!”
11|8|And if We delay their punishment until an appointed time, they will definitely say, “What is holding it back?” Indeed, on the Day it overtakes them, it will not be averted from them, and they will be overwhelmed by what they used to ridicule
11|9|If We give people a taste of Our mercy then take it away from them, they become utterly desperate, ungrateful
11|10|But if We give them a taste of prosperity after being touched with adversity, they say, “My ills are gone,” and become totally prideful and boastful
11|11|except those who patiently endure and do good. It is they who will have forgiveness and a mighty reward
11|12|Perhaps you ˹O Prophet˺ may wish to give up some of what is revealed to you and may be distressed by it because they say, “If only a treasure had been sent down to him, or an angel had come with him!” You are only a warner, and God is the Trustee of All Affairs
11|13|Or do they say, “He has fabricated this ˹Quran˺!”? Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Produce ten fabricated sûrahs like it and seek help from whoever you can—other than God—if what you say is true!”
11|14|But if your helpers fail you, then know that it has been revealed with the knowledge of God, and that there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him! Will you ˹not˺ then submit ˹to God˺
11|15|Whoever desires ˹only˺ this worldly life and its luxuries, We will pay them in full for their deeds in this life—nothing will be left out
11|16|It is they who will have nothing in the Hereafter except the Fire. Their efforts in this life will be fruitless and their deeds will be useless
11|17|˹Can these people be compared to˺ those ˹believers˺ who stand on clear proof from their Lord, backed by ˹the Quran as˺ a witness from Him, and preceded by the Book of Moses ˹which was revealed˺ as a guide and mercy? It is those ˹believers˺ who have faith in it. But whoever from the ˹disbelieving˺ groups rejects it, the Fire will be their destiny. So do not be in doubt of it. It is certainly the truth from your Lord, but most people do not believe
11|18|Who does more wrong than those who fabricate lies against God? They will be brought before their Lord, and the witnesses will say, “These are the ones who lied against their Lord.” Surely God’s condemnation is upon the wrongdoers
11|19|who hinder ˹others˺ from God’s Path, striving to make it ˹appear˺ crooked, and disbelieve in the Hereafter
11|20|They will never frustrate God on earth, and they will have no protector besides God. Their punishment will be multiplied, for they failed to hear or see ˹the truth˺
11|21|It is they who have ruined themselves, and whatever ˹gods˺ they fabricated will fail them
11|22|Without a doubt, they will be the worst losers in the Hereafter
11|23|Surely those who believe, do good, and humble themselves before their Lord will be the residents of Paradise. They will be there forever
11|24|The example of these two parties is that of the blind and the deaf, compared to the seeing and the hearing. Can the two be equal? Will you not then be mindful
11|25|Surely We sent Noah to his people. ˹He said,˺ “Indeed, I am sent to you with a clear warning
11|26|that you should worship none but God. I truly fear for you the torment of a painful Day.”
11|27|The disbelieving chiefs of his people said, “We see you only as a human being like ourselves, and we see that no one follows you except the lowliest among us, who do so ˹hastily˺ without thinking. We do not see anything that makes ˹all of˺ you any better than us. In fact, we think you are liars.”
11|28|He said, “O my people! Consider if I stand on a clear proof from my Lord and He has blessed me with a mercy from Himself, which you fail to see. Should we ˹then˺ force it on you against your will
11|29|O my people! I do not ask you for a payment for this ˹message˺. My reward is only from God. And I will never dismiss the believers, for they will surely meet their Lord. But I can see that you are a people acting ignorantly
11|30|O my people! Who would protect me from God if I were to dismiss them? Will you not then be mindful
11|31|I do not say to you that I possess God’s treasuries or know the unseen, nor do I claim to be an angel, nor do I say that God will never grant goodness to those you look down upon. God knows best what is ˹hidden˺ within them. ˹If I did,˺ then I would truly be one of the wrongdoers.”
11|32|They protested, “O Noah! You have argued with us far too much, so bring upon us what you threaten us with, if what you say is true.”
11|33|He responded, “It is God Who can bring it upon you if He wills, and then you will have no escape
11|34|My advice will not benefit you—no matter how hard I try—if God wills ˹for˺ you to stray. He is your Lord, and to Him you will ˹all˺ be returned.”
11|35|Or do they say, “He has fabricated this ˹Quran˺!”? Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “If I have done so, then I bear the burden of that sin! But I am free from your sinful accusation.”
11|36|And it was revealed to Noah, “None of your people will believe except those who already have. So do not be distressed by what they have been doing
11|37|And build the Ark under Our ˹watchful˺ Eyes and directions, and do not plead with Me for those who have done wrong, for they will surely be drowned.”
11|38|So he began to build the Ark, and whenever some of the chiefs of his people passed by, they mocked him. He said, “If you laugh at us, we will ˹soon˺ laugh at you similarly
11|39|You will soon come to know who will be visited by a humiliating torment ˹in this life˺ and overwhelmed by an everlasting punishment ˹in the next˺.”
11|40|And when Our command came and the oven burst ˹with water˺, We said ˹to Noah˺, “Take into the Ark a pair from every species along with your family—except those against whom the decree ˹to drown˺ has already been passed—and those who believe.” But none believed with him except for a few
11|41|And he said, “Board it! In the Name of God it will sail and cast anchor. Surely my Lord is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful.”
11|42|And ˹so˺ the Ark sailed with them through waves like mountains. Noah called out to his son, who stood apart, “O my dear son! Come aboard with us and do not be with the disbelievers.”
11|43|He replied, “I will take refuge on a mountain, which will protect me from the water.” Noah cried, “Today no one is protected from God’s decree except those to whom He shows mercy!” And the waves came between them, and his son was among the drowned
11|44|And it was said, “O earth! Swallow up your water. And O sky! Withhold ˹your rain˺.” The floodwater receded and the decree was carried out. The Ark rested on Mount Judi, and it was said, “Away with the wrongdoing people!”
11|45|Noah called out to his Lord, saying, “My Lord! Certainly my son is ˹also˺ of my family, Your promise is surely true, and You are the most just of all judges!”
11|46|God replied, “O Noah! He is certainly not of your family—he was entirely of unrighteous conduct. So do not ask Me about what you have no knowledge of! I warn you so you do not fall into ignorance.”
11|47|Noah pleaded, “My Lord, I seek refuge in You from asking You about what I have no knowledge of, and unless You forgive me and have mercy on me, I will be one of the losers.”
11|48|It was said, “O Noah! Disembark with Our peace and blessings on you and some of the descendants of those with you. As for the others, We will allow them ˹a brief˺ enjoyment, then they will be touched with a painful punishment from Us.”
11|49|This is one of the stories of the unseen, which we reveal to you ˹O Prophet˺. Neither you nor your people knew it before this. So be patient! Surely the ultimate outcome belongs ˹only˺ to the righteous
11|50|And to the people of ’Âd We sent their brother Hûd. He said, “O my people! Worship God. You have no god other than Him. You do nothing but fabricate lies ˹against God˺
11|51|O my people! I do not ask you for any reward for this ˹message˺. My reward is only from the One Who created me. Will you not then understand
11|52|And O my people! Seek your Lord’s forgiveness and turn to Him in repentance. He will shower you with rain in abundance, and add strength to your strength. So do not turn away, persisting in wickedness.”
11|53|They argued, “O Hûd! You have not given us any clear proof, and we will never abandon our gods upon your word, nor will we believe in you
11|54|All we can say is that some of our gods have possessed you with evil.” He said, “I call God to witness, and you too bear witness, that I ˹totally˺ reject whatever you associate
11|55|with Him ˹in worship˺. So let all of you plot against me without delay
11|56|I have put my trust in God—my Lord and your Lord. There is no living creature that is not completely under His control. Surely my Lord’s Way is perfect justice
11|57|But if you turn away, I have already delivered to you what I have been sent with. My Lord will replace you with others. You are not harming Him in the least. Indeed, my Lord is a ˹vigilant˺ Keeper over all things.”
11|58|When Our command came, We rescued Hûd and those who believed with him by a mercy from Us, saving them from a harsh torment
11|59|That was ’Âd. They denied the signs of their Lord, disobeyed His messengers, and followed the command of every stubborn tyrant
11|60|They were followed by a curse in this world, as they will be on the Day of Judgment. Surely ’Âd denied their Lord. So away with ’Âd, the people of Hûd
11|61|And to the people of Thamûd We sent their brother Ṣâliḥ. He said, “O my people! Worship God. You have no god other than Him. He ˹is the One Who˺ produced you from the earth and settled you on it. So seek His forgiveness and turn to Him in repentance. Surely my Lord is Ever Near, All-Responsive ˹to prayers˺.”
11|62|They argued, “O Ṣâliḥ! We truly had high hopes in you before this. How dare you forbid us to worship what our forefathers had worshipped? We are certainly in alarming doubt about what you are inviting us to.”
11|63|He responded, “O my people! Consider if I stand on a clear proof from my Lord and He has blessed me with a mercy from Him. Who could help me against God if I were to disobey Him? You would only contribute to my doom
11|64|And O my people! This she-camel of God is a sign for you. So leave her to graze ˹freely˺ on God’s earth and do her no harm, or a swift punishment will overtake you!”
11|65|But they killed her, so he warned ˹them˺, “You have ˹only˺ three ˹more˺ days to enjoy life in your homes—this is an unfailing promise!”
11|66|When Our command came, We saved Ṣâliḥ and those who believed with him by a mercy from Us and spared them the disgrace of that Day. Surely your Lord ˹alone˺ is the All-Powerful, Almighty
11|67|And the ˹mighty˺ blast overtook the wrongdoers, so they fell lifeless in their homes
11|68|as if they had never lived there. Surely Thamûd denied their Lord, so away with Thamûd
11|69|And surely Our messenger-angels came to Abraham with good news ˹of a son˺. They greeted ˹him with˺, “Peace!” And he replied, “Peace ˹be upon you˺!” Then it was not long before he brought ˹them˺ a ˹fat,˺ roasted calf
11|70|And when he saw that their hands did not reach for the food, he became suspicious and fearful of them. They reassured ˹him˺, “Do not be afraid! We are ˹angels˺ sent ˹only˺ against the people of Lot.”
11|71|And his wife was standing by, so she laughed, then We gave her good news of ˹the birth of˺ Isaac, and, after him, Jacob
11|72|She wondered, “Oh, my! How can I have a child in this old age, and my husband here is an old man? This is truly an astonishing thing!”
11|73|They responded, “Are you astonished by God’s decree? May God’s mercy and blessings be upon you, O people of this house. Indeed, He is Praiseworthy, All-Glorious.”
11|74|Then after the fear had left Abraham, and the good news had reached him, he began to plead with Us for the people of Lot
11|75|Truly, Abraham was forbearing, tender-hearted, and ever turning ˹to his Lord˺
11|76|˹The angels said,˺ “O Abraham! Plead no more! Your Lord’s decree has already come, and they will certainly be afflicted with a punishment that cannot be averted!”
11|77|When Our messenger-angels came to Lot, he was distressed and worried by their arrival. He said, “This is a terrible day.”
11|78|And ˹the men of˺ his people—who were used to shameful deeds—came to him rushing. He pleaded, “O my people! Here are my daughters ˹for marriage˺—they are pure for you. So fear God, and do not humiliate me by disrespecting my guests. Is there not ˹even˺ a single right-minded man among you?”
11|79|They argued, “You certainly know that we have no need for your daughters. You already know what we desire!”
11|80|He responded, “If only I had the strength ˹to resist you˺ or could rely on a strong supporter.”
11|81|The angels said, “O Lot! We are the messengers of your Lord. They will never reach you. So travel with your family in the dark of night, and do not let any of you look back, except your wife. She will certainly suffer the fate of the others. Their appointed time is the morning. Is the morning not near?”
11|82|When Our command came, We turned the cities upside down and rained down on them clustered stones of baked clay
11|83|marked by your Lord ˹O Prophet˺. And these stones are not far from the ˹pagan˺ wrongdoers
11|84|And to the people of Midian We sent their brother Shu’aib. He said, “O my people! Worship God. You have no god other than Him. And do not give short measure and weight. I do see you in prosperity now, but I truly fear for you the torment of an overwhelming Day
11|85|O my people! Give full measure and weigh with justice. Do not defraud people of their property, nor go about spreading corruption in the land
11|86|What is left ˹as a lawful gain˺ by God is far better for you if you are ˹truly˺ believers. And I am not a keeper over you.”
11|87|They asked ˹sarcastically˺, “O Shu’aib! Does your prayer command you that we should abandon what our forefathers worshipped or give up managing our wealth as we please? Indeed, you are such a tolerant, sensible man!”
11|88|He said, “O my people! Consider if I stand on a clear proof from my Lord and He has blessed me with a good provision from Him. I do not want to do what I am forbidding you from. I only intend reform to the best of my ability. My success comes only through God. In Him I trust and to Him I turn
11|89|O my people! Do not let your opposition to me lead you to a fate similar to that of the people of Noah, or Hûd, or Ṣâliḥ. And the people of Lot are not far from you
11|90|So seek your Lord’s forgiveness and turn to Him in repentance. Surely my Lord is Most Merciful, All-Loving.”
11|91|They threatened, “O Shu’aib! We do not comprehend much of what you say, and surely we see you powerless among us. Were it not for your clan, we would have certainly stoned you, for you are nothing to us.”
11|92|He said, “O my people! Do you have more regard for my clan than for God, turning your back on Him entirely? Surely my Lord is Fully Aware of what you do
11|93|O my people! Persist in your ways, for I ˹too˺ will persist in mine. You will soon come to know who will be visited by a humiliating torment and is a liar! And watch! I too am watching with you!”
11|94|When Our command came, We saved Shu’aib and those who believed with him by a mercy from Us. And the ˹mighty˺ blast overtook the wrongdoers, so they fell lifeless in their homes
11|95|as if they had never lived there. So away with Midian as it was with Thamûd
11|96|Indeed, We sent Moses with Our signs and compelling proof
11|97|to Pharaoh and his chiefs, but they followed the command of Pharaoh, and Pharaoh’s command was not well guided
11|98|He will be before his people on the Day of Judgment and will lead them into the Fire. What an evil place to be led into
11|99|They were followed by a curse in this ˹life˺ and ˹will receive another˺ on the Day of Judgment. What an evil gift to receive
11|100|These are accounts, We relate to you ˹O Prophet˺, of the ˹destroyed˺ cities. Some are still standing ˹barren˺, while others have been mowed down
11|101|We did not wrong them, rather they wronged themselves. The gods they invoked beside God were of no help at all when the command of your Lord came, and only contributed to their ruin
11|102|Such is the ˹crushing˺ grip of your Lord when He seizes the societies entrenched in wrongdoing. Indeed, His grip is ˹terribly˺ painful and severe
11|103|Surely in this is a sign for those who fear the torment of the Hereafter. That is a Day for which humanity will be gathered and a Day ˹that will be˺ witnessed ˹by all˺
11|104|We only delay it for a fixed term
11|105|When that Day arrives, no one will dare speak except with His permission. Some of them will be miserable, others joyful
11|106|As for those bound for misery, they will be in the Fire, where they will be sighing and gasping
11|107|staying there forever, as long as the heavens and the earth will endure, except what your Lord wills. Surely your Lord does what He intends
11|108|And as for those destined to joy, they will be in Paradise, staying there forever, as long as the heavens and the earth will endure, except what your Lord wills—a ˹generous˺ giving, without end
11|109|So do not be in doubt ˹O Prophet˺ about what those ˹pagans˺ worship. They worship nothing except what their forefathers worshipped before ˹them˺. And We will certainly give them their share ˹of punishment˺ in full, without any reduction
11|110|Indeed, We had given Moses the Scripture, but differences arose regarding it. Had it not been for a prior decree from your Lord, their differences would have been settled ˹at once˺. They are truly in alarming doubt about it
11|111|And surely your Lord will fully pay all for their deeds. He is certainly All-Aware of what they do
11|112|So be steadfast as you are commanded ˹O Prophet˺, along with those who turn ˹in submission to God˺ with you. And do not transgress. Surely He is All-Seeing of what you ˹believers˺ do
11|113|And do not be inclined to the wrongdoers or you will be touched by the Fire. For then you would have no protectors other than God, nor would you be helped
11|114|Establish prayer ˹O Prophet˺ at both ends of the day and in the early part of the night. Surely good deeds wipe out evil deeds. That is a reminder for the mindful
11|115|And be patient! Certainly God does not discount the reward of the good-doers
11|116|If only there had been among the ˹destroyed˺ peoples before you, ˹O believers,˺ virtuous individuals who forbade corruption in the land—other than the few We had saved ˹from the torment˺. But the wrongdoers ˹only˺ pursued their ˹worldly˺ pleasures, becoming wicked
11|117|And your Lord ˹O Prophet˺ would never destroy a society unjustly while its people were acting rightly
11|118|Had your Lord so willed, He would have certainly made humanity one single community ˹of believers˺, but they will always ˹choose to˺ differ—
11|119|except those shown mercy by your Lord—and so He created them ˹to choose freely˺. And so the Word of your Lord will be fulfilled: “I will surely fill up Hell with jinn and humans all together.”
11|120|And We relate to you ˹O Prophet˺ the stories of the messengers to reassure your heart. And there has come to you in this ˹sûrah˺ the truth, a warning ˹to the disbelievers˺, and a reminder to the believers
11|121|Say to those who disbelieve, “Persist in your ways; we will certainly persist in ours
11|122|And wait! Surely we ˹too˺ are waiting.”
11|123|To God ˹alone˺ belongs the knowledge of what is hidden in the heavens and the earth. And to Him all matters are returned. So worship Him and put your trust in Him. And your Lord is never unaware of what you do
12|1|Alif-Lãm-Ra. These are the verses of the clear Book
12|2|Indeed, We have sent it down as an Arabic Quran so that you may understand
12|3|We relate to you ˹O Prophet˺ the best of stories through Our revelation of this Quran, though before this you were totally unaware ˹of them˺
12|4|˹Remember˺ when Joseph said to his father, “O my dear father! Indeed I dreamt of eleven stars, and the sun, and the moon—I saw them prostrating to me!”
12|5|He replied, “O my dear son! Do not relate your vision to your brothers, or they will devise a plot against you. Surely Satan is a sworn enemy to humankind
12|6|And so will your Lord choose you ˹O Joseph˺, and teach you the interpretation of dreams, and perfect His favour upon you and the descendants of Jacob—˹just˺ as He once perfected it upon your forefathers, Abraham and Isaac. Surely your Lord is All-Knowing, All-Wise.”
12|7|Indeed, in the story of Joseph and his brothers there are lessons for all who ask
12|8|˹Remember˺ when they said ˹to one another˺, “Surely Joseph and his brother ˹Benjamin˺ are more beloved to our father than we, even though we are a group of so many. Indeed, our father is clearly mistaken
12|9|Kill Joseph or cast him out to some ˹distant˺ land so that our father’s attention will be only ours, then after that you may ˹repent and˺ become righteous people!”
12|10|One of them said, “Do not kill Joseph. But if you must do something, throw him into the bottom of a well so perhaps he may be picked up by some travellers.”
12|11|They said, “O our father! Why do you not trust us with Joseph, although we truly wish him well
12|12|Send him out with us tomorrow so that he may enjoy himself and play. And we will really watch over him.”
12|13|He responded, “It would truly sadden me if you took him away with you, and I fear that a wolf may devour him while you are negligent of him.”
12|14|They said, “If a wolf were to devour him, despite our strong group, then we would certainly be losers!”
12|15|And so, when they took him away and decided to throw him into the bottom of the well, We inspired him: “˹One day˺ you will remind them of this deed of theirs while they are unaware ˹of who you are˺.”
12|16|Then they returned to their father in the evening, weeping
12|17|They cried, “Our father! We went racing and left Joseph with our belongings, and a wolf devoured him! But you will not believe us, no matter how truthful we are.”
12|18|And they brought his shirt, stained with false blood. He responded, “No! Your souls must have tempted you to do something ˹evil˺. So ˹I can only endure with˺ beautiful patience! It is God’s help that I seek to bear your claims.”
12|19|And there came some travellers, and they sent their water-boy who let down his bucket into the well. He cried out, “Oh, what a great find! Here is a boy!” And they took him secretly ˹to be sold˺ as merchandise, but God is All-Knowing of what they did
12|20|They ˹later˺ sold him for a cheap price, just a few silver coins—only wanting to get rid of him
12|21|The man from Egypt who bought him said to his wife, “Take good care of him, perhaps he may be useful to us or we may adopt him as a son.” This is how We established Joseph in the land, so that We might teach him the interpretation of dreams. God’s Will always prevails, but most people do not know
12|22|And when he reached maturity, We gave him wisdom and knowledge. This is how We reward the good-doers
12|23|And the lady, in whose house he lived, tried to seduce him. She locked the doors ˹firmly˺ and said, “Come to me!” He replied, “God is my refuge! It is ˹not right to betray˺ my master, who has taken good care of me. Indeed, the wrongdoers never succeed.”
12|24|She advanced towards him, and he would have done likewise, had he not seen a sign from his Lord. This is how We kept evil and indecency away from him, for he was truly one of Our chosen servants
12|25|They raced for the door and she tore his shirt from the back, only to find her husband at the door. She cried, “What is the penalty for someone who tried to violate your wife, except imprisonment or a painful punishment?”
12|26|Joseph responded, “It was she who tried to seduce me.” And a witness from her own family testified: “If his shirt is torn from the front, then she has told the truth and he is a liar
12|27|But if it is torn from the back, then she has lied and he is truthful.”
12|28|So when her husband saw that Joseph’s shirt was torn from the back, he said ˹to her˺, “This must be ˹an example˺ of the cunning of you ˹women˺! Indeed, your cunning is so shrewd
12|29|O Joseph! Forget about this. And you ˹O wife˺! Seek forgiveness for your sin. It certainly has been your fault.”
12|30|Some women of the city gossiped, “The Chief Minister’s wife is trying to seduce her slave-boy. Love for him has plagued her heart. Indeed, we see that she is clearly mistaken.”
12|31|When she heard about their gossip, she invited them and set a banquet for them. She gave each one a knife, then said ˹to Joseph˺, “Come out before them.” When they saw him, they were so stunned ˹by his beauty˺ that they cut their hands, and exclaimed, “Good God! This cannot be human; this must be a noble angel!”
12|32|She said, “This is the one for whose love you criticized me! I did try to seduce him but he ˹firmly˺ refused. And if he does not do what I order him to, he will certainly be imprisoned and ˹fully˺ disgraced.”
12|33|Joseph prayed, “My Lord! I would rather be in jail than do what they invite me to. And if You do not turn their cunning away from me, I might yield to them and fall into ignorance.”
12|34|So his Lord responded to him, turning their cunning away from him. Surely He is the All-Hearing, All-Knowing
12|35|And so it occurred to those in charge, despite seeing all the proofs ˹of his innocence˺, that he should be imprisoned for a while
12|36|And two other servants went to jail with Joseph. One of them said, “I dreamt I was pressing wine.” The other said, “I dreamt I was carrying ˹some˺ bread on my head, from which birds were eating.” ˹Then both said,˺ “Tell us their interpretation, for we surely see you as one of the good-doers.”
12|37|Joseph replied, “I can even tell you what kind of meal you will be served before you receive it. This ˹knowledge˺ is from what my Lord has taught me. I have shunned the faith of a people who disbelieve in God and deny the Hereafter
12|38|I follow the faith of my fathers: Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. It is not ˹right˺ for us to associate anything with God ˹in worship˺. This is part of God’s grace upon us and humanity, but most people are not grateful
12|39|O my fellow-prisoners! Which is far better: many different lords or God—the One, the Supreme
12|40|Whatever ˹idols˺ you worship instead of Him are mere names which you and your forefathers have made up—a practice God has never authorized. It is only God Who decides. He has commanded that you worship none but Him. That is the upright faith, but most people do not know
12|41|“O my fellow-prisoners! ˹The first˺ one of you will serve wine to his master, and the other will be crucified and the birds will eat from his head. The matter about which you inquired has been decided.”
12|42|Then he said to the one he knew would survive, “Mention me in the presence of your master.” But Satan made him forget to mention Joseph to his master, so he remained in prison for several years
12|43|And ˹one day˺ the King said, “I dreamt of seven fat cows eaten up by seven skinny ones; and seven green ears of grain and ˹seven˺ others dry. O chiefs! Tell me the meaning of my dream if you can interpret dreams.”
12|44|They replied, “These are confused visions and we do not know the interpretation of such dreams.”
12|45|˹Finally,˺ the surviving ex-prisoner remembered ˹Joseph˺ after a long time and said, “I will tell you its interpretation, so send me forth ˹to Joseph˺.”
12|46|˹He said,˺ “Joseph, O man of truth! Interpret for us ˹the dream of˺ seven fat cows eaten up by seven skinny ones; and seven green ears of grain and ˹seven˺ others dry, so that I may return to the people and let them know.”
12|47|Joseph replied, “You will plant ˹grain˺ for seven consecutive years, leaving in the ear whatever you will harvest, except for the little you will eat
12|48|Then after that will come seven years of great hardship which will consume whatever you have saved, except the little you will store ˹for seed˺
12|49|Then after that will come a year in which people will receive abundant rain and they will press ˹oil and wine˺.”
12|50|The King ˹then˺ said, “Bring him to me.” When the messenger came to him, Joseph said, “Go back to your master and ask him about the case of the women who cut their hands. Surely my Lord has ˹full˺ knowledge of their cunning.”
12|51|The King asked ˹the women˺, “What did you get when you tried to seduce Joseph?” They replied, “God forbid! We know nothing indecent about him.” Then the Chief Minister’s wife admitted, “Now the truth has come to light. It was I who tried to seduce him, and he is surely truthful
12|52|From this, Joseph should know that I did not speak dishonestly about him in his absence, for God certainly does not guide the scheming of the dishonest
12|53|And I do not seek to free myself from blame, for indeed the soul is ever inclined to evil, except those shown mercy by my Lord. Surely my Lord is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful.”
12|54|The King said, “Bring him to me. I will employ him exclusively in my service.” And when Joseph spoke to him, the King said, “Today you are highly esteemed and fully trusted by us.”
12|55|Joseph proposed, “Put me in charge of the store-houses of the land, for I am truly reliable and adept.”
12|56|This is how We established Joseph in the land to settle wherever he pleased. We shower Our mercy on whoever We will, and We never discount the reward of the good-doers
12|57|And the reward of the Hereafter is far better for those who are faithful and are mindful ˹of God˺
12|58|And Joseph’s brothers came and entered his presence. He recognized them but they were unaware of who he really was
12|59|When he had provided them with their supplies, he demanded, “Bring me your brother on your father’s side. Do you not see that I give full measure and I am the best of hosts
12|60|But if you do not bring him to me ˹next time˺, I will have no grain for you, nor will you ever come close to me again.”
12|61|They promised, “We will try to convince his father to let him come. We will certainly do ˹our best˺.”
12|62|Joseph ordered his servants to put his brothers’ money back into their saddlebags so that they would find it when they returned to their family and perhaps they would come back
12|63|When Joseph’s brothers returned to their father, they pleaded, “O our father! We have been denied ˹further˺ supplies. So send our brother with us so that we may receive our measure, and we will definitely watch over him.”
12|64|He responded, “Should I trust you with him as I once trusted you with his brother ˹Joseph˺? But ˹only˺ God is the best Protector, and He is the Most Merciful of the merciful.”
12|65|When they opened their bags, they discovered that their money had been returned to them. They argued, “O our father! What more can we ask for? Here is our money, fully returned to us. Now we can buy more food for our family. We will watch over our brother, and obtain an extra camel-load of grain. That load can be easily secured.”
12|66|Jacob insisted, “I will not send him with you until you give me a solemn oath by God that you will certainly bring him back to me, unless you are totally overpowered.” Then after they had given him their oaths, he concluded, “God is a Witness to what we have said.”
12|67|He then instructed ˹them˺, “O my sons! Do not enter ˹the city˺ all through one gate, but through separate gates. I cannot help you against ˹what is destined by˺ God in the least. It is only God Who decides. In Him I put my trust. And in Him let the faithful put their trust.”
12|68|Then when they entered as their father had instructed them, this did not help them against ˹the Will of˺ God whatsoever. It was just a desire in Jacob’s heart which he satisfied. He was truly blessed with ˹great˺ knowledge because of what We had taught him, but most people have no knowledge
12|69|When they entered Joseph’s presence, he called his brother ˹Benjamin˺ aside, and confided ˹to him˺, “I am indeed your brother ˹Joseph˺! So do not feel distressed about what they have been doing.”
12|70|When Joseph had provided them with supplies, he slipped the royal cup into his brother’s bag. Then a herald cried, “O people of the caravan! You must be thieves!”
12|71|They asked, turning back, “What have you lost?”
12|72|The herald ˹along with the guards˺ replied, “We have lost the King’s measuring cup. And whoever brings it will be awarded a camel-load ˹of grain˺. I guarantee it.”
12|73|Joseph’s brothers replied, “By God! You know well that we did not come to cause trouble in the land, nor are we thieves.”
12|74|Joseph’s men asked, “What should be the price for theft, if you are lying?”
12|75|Joseph’s brothers responded, “The price will be ˹the enslavement of˺ the one in whose bag the cup is found. That is how we punish the wrongdoers.”
12|76|Joseph began searching their bags before that of his brother ˹Benjamin˺, then brought it out of Benjamin’s bag. This is how We inspired Joseph to plan. He could not have taken his brother under the King’s law, but God had so willed. We elevate in rank whoever We will. But above those ranking in knowledge is the One All-Knowing
12|77|˹To distance themselves,˺ Joseph’s brothers argued, “If he has stolen, so did his ˹full˺ brother before.” But Joseph suppressed his outrage—revealing nothing to them—and said ˹to himself˺, “You are in such an evil position, and God knows best ˹the truth of˺ what you claim.”
12|78|They appealed, “O Chief Minister! He has a very old father, so take one of us instead. We surely see you as one of the good-doers.”
12|79|Joseph responded, “God forbid that we should take other than the one with whom we found our property. Otherwise, we would surely be unjust.”
12|80|When they lost all hope in him, they spoke privately. The eldest of them said, “Do you not know that your father had taken a solemn oath by God from you, nor how you failed him regarding Joseph before? So I am not leaving this land until my father allows me to, or God decides for me. For He is the Best of Judges
12|81|Return to your father and say, ‘O our father! Your son committed theft. We testify only to what we know. We could not guard against the unforeseen
12|82|Ask ˹the people of˺ the land where we were and the caravan we travelled with. We are certainly telling the truth.’”
12|83|He cried, “No! Your souls must have tempted you to do something ˹evil˺. So ˹I am left with nothing but˺ beautiful patience! I trust God will return them all to me. Surely He ˹alone˺ is the All-Knowing, All-Wise.”
12|84|He turned away from them, lamenting, “Alas, poor Joseph!” And his eyes turned white out of the grief he suppressed
12|85|They said, “By God! You will not cease to remember Joseph until you lose your health or ˹even˺ your life.”
12|86|He replied, “I complain of my anguish and sorrow only to God, and I know from God what you do not know
12|87|O my sons! Go and search ˹diligently˺ for Joseph and his brother. And do not lose hope in the mercy of God, for no one loses hope in God’s mercy except those with no faith.”
12|88|When they entered Joseph’s presence, they pleaded, “O Chief Minister! We and our family have been touched with hardship, and we have brought only a few worthless coins, but ˹please˺ give us our supplies in full and be charitable to us. Indeed, God rewards the charitable.”
12|89|He asked, “Do you remember what you did to Joseph and his brother in your ignorance?”
12|90|They replied ˹in shock˺, “Are you really Joseph?” He said, “I am Joseph, and here is my brother ˹Benjamin˺! God has truly been gracious to us. Surely whoever is mindful ˹of God˺ and patient, then certainly God never discounts the reward of the good-doers.”
12|91|They admitted, “By God! God has truly preferred you over us, and we have surely been sinful.”
12|92|Joseph said, “There is no blame on you today. May God forgive you! He is the Most Merciful of the merciful
12|93|Go with this shirt of mine and cast it over my father’s face, and he will regain his sight. Then come back to me with your whole family.”
12|94|When the caravan departed ˹from Egypt˺, their father said ˹to those around him˺, “You may think I am senile, but I certainly sense the smell of Joseph.”
12|95|They replied, “By God! You are definitely still in your old delusion.”
12|96|But when the bearer of the good news arrived, he cast the shirt over Jacob’s face, so he regained his sight. Jacob then said ˹to his children˺, “Did I not tell you that I truly know from God what you do not know?”
12|97|They begged, “O our father! Pray for the forgiveness of our sins. We have certainly been sinful.”
12|98|He said, “I will pray to my Lord for your forgiveness. He ˹alone˺ is indeed the All-Forgiving, Most Merciful.”
12|99|When they entered Joseph’s presence, he received his parents ˹graciously˺ and said, “Enter Egypt, God willing, in security.”
12|100|Then he raised his parents to the throne, and they all fell down in prostration to Joseph, who then said, “O my dear father! This is the interpretation of my old dream. My Lord has made it come true. He was truly kind to me when He freed me from prison, and brought you all from the desert after Satan had ignited rivalry between me and my siblings. Indeed my Lord is subtle in fulfilling what He wills. Surely He ˹alone˺ is the All-Knowing, All-Wise.”
12|101|“My Lord! You have surely granted me authority and taught me the interpretation of dreams. ˹O˺ Originator of the heavens and the earth! You are my Guardian in this world and the Hereafter. Allow me to die as one who submits and join me with the righteous.”
12|102|That is from the stories of the unseen which We reveal to you ˹O Prophet˺. You were not present when they ˹all˺ made up their minds, and when they plotted ˹against Joseph˺
12|103|And most people will not believe—no matter how keen you are—
12|104|even though you are not asking them for a reward for this ˹Quran˺. It is only a reminder to the whole world
12|105|How many signs in the heavens and the earth do they pass by with indifference
12|106|And most of them do not believe in God without associating others with Him ˹in worship˺
12|107|Do they feel secure that an overwhelming torment from God will not overtake them, or that the Hour will not take them by surprise when they least expect ˹it˺
12|108|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “This is my way. I invite to God with insight—I and those who follow me. Glory be to God, and I am not one of the polytheists.”
12|109|We only sent before you ˹O Prophet˺ men inspired by Us from among the people of each society. Have the deniers not travelled through the land to see what was the end of those ˹destroyed˺ before them? And surely the ˹eternal˺ Home of the Hereafter is far better for those mindful ˹of God˺. Will you not then understand
12|110|And when the messengers despaired and their people thought the messengers had been denied help, Our help came to them ˹at last˺. We then saved whoever We willed, and Our punishment is never averted from the wicked people
12|111|In their stories there is truly a lesson for people of reason. This message cannot be a fabrication, rather ˹it is˺ a confirmation of previous revelation, a detailed explanation of all things, a guide, and a mercy for people of faith
13|1|Alif-Lãm-Mĩm-Ra. These are the verses of the Book. What has been revealed to you ˹O Prophet˺ from your Lord is the truth, but most people do not believe
13|2|It is God Who has raised the heavens without pillars—as you can see—then established Himself on the Throne. He has subjected the sun and the moon, each orbiting for an appointed term. He conducts the whole affair. He makes the signs clear so that you may be certain of the meeting with your Lord
13|3|And He is the One Who spread out the earth and placed firm mountains and rivers upon it, and created fruits of every kind in pairs. He covers the day with night. Surely in this are signs for those who reflect
13|4|And on the earth there are ˹different˺ neighbouring tracts, gardens of grapevines, ˹various˺ crops, palm trees—some stemming from the same root, others standing alone. They are all irrigated with the same water, yet We make some taste better than others. Surely in this are signs for those who understand
13|5|˹Now,˺ if anything should amaze you ˹O Prophet˺, then it is their question: “When we are reduced to dust, will we really be raised as a new creation?” It is they who have disbelieved in their Lord. It is they who will have shackles around their necks. And it is they who will be the residents of the Fire. They will be there forever
13|6|They ask you ˹O Prophet˺ to hasten the torment rather than grace, though there have ˹already˺ been ˹many˺ torments before them. Surely your Lord is full of forgiveness for people, despite their wrongdoing, and your Lord is truly severe in punishment
13|7|The disbelievers say, “If only a sign could be sent down to him from his Lord.” You ˹O Prophet˺ are only a warner. And every people had a guide
13|8|God knows what every female bears and what increases and decreases in the wombs. And with Him everything is determined with precision
13|9|˹He is the˺ Knower of the seen and the unseen—the All-Great, Most Exalted
13|10|It is the same ˹to Him˺ whether any of you speaks secretly or openly, whether one hides in the darkness of night or goes about in broad daylight
13|11|For each one there are successive angels before and behind, protecting them by God’s command. Indeed, God would never change a people’s state ˹of favour˺ until they change their own state ˹of faith˺. And if it is God’s Will to torment a people, it can never be averted, nor can they find a protector other than Him
13|12|He is the One Who shows you lightning, inspiring ˹you with˺ hope and fear, and produces heavy clouds
13|13|The thunder glorifies His praises, as do the angels in awe of Him. He sends thunderbolts, striking with them whoever He wills. Yet they dispute about God. And He is tremendous in might
13|14|Calling upon Him ˹alone˺ is the truth. But those ˹idols˺ the pagans invoke besides Him ˹can˺ never respond to them in any way. ˹It is˺ just like someone who stretches out their hands to water, ˹asking it˺ to reach their mouths, but it can never do so. The calls of the disbelievers are only in vain
13|15|To God ˹alone˺ bow down ˹in submission˺ all those in the heavens and the earth—willingly or unwillingly—as do their shadows, morning and evening
13|16|Ask ˹them, O Prophet˺, “Who is the Lord of the heavens and the earth?” Say, “God!” Ask ˹them˺, “Why ˹then˺ have you taken besides Him lords who cannot even benefit or protect themselves?” Say, “Can the blind and the sighted be equal? Or can darkness and light be equal?” Or have they associated with God partners who ˹supposedly˺ produced a creation like His, leaving them confused between the two creations? Say, “God is the Creator of all things, and He is the One, the Supreme.”
13|17|He sends down rain from the sky, causing the valleys to flow, each according to its capacity. The currents then carry along rising foam, similar to the slag produced from metal that people melt in the fire for ornaments or tools. This is how God compares truth to falsehood. The ˹worthless˺ residue is then cast away, but what benefits people remains on the earth. This is how God sets forth parables
13|18|Those who respond to ˹the call of˺ their Lord will have the finest reward. As for those who do not respond to Him, even if they were to possess everything in the world twice over, they would certainly offer it to ransom themselves. They will face strict judgment, and Hell will be their home. What an evil place to rest
13|19|Can the one who knows that your Lord’s revelation to you ˹O Prophet˺ is the truth be like the one who is blind? None will be mindful ˹of this˺ except people of reason
13|20|˹They are˺ those who honour God’s covenant, never breaking the pledge
13|21|and those who maintain whatever ˹ties˺ God has ordered to be maintained, stand in awe of their Lord, and fear strict judgment
13|22|And ˹they are˺ those who endure patiently, seeking their Lord’s pleasure, establish prayer, donate from what We have provided for them—secretly and openly—and respond to evil with good. It is they who will have the ultimate abode
13|23|the Gardens of Eternity, which they will enter along with the righteous among their parents, spouses, and descendants. And the angels will enter upon them from every gate, ˹saying,˺
13|24|“Peace be upon you for your perseverance. How excellent is the ultimate abode!”
13|25|And those who violate God’s covenant after it has been affirmed, break whatever ˹ties˺ God has ordered to be maintained, and spread corruption in the land—it is they who will be condemned and will have the worst abode
13|26|God gives abundant or limited provisions to whoever He wills. And the disbelievers become prideful of ˹the pleasures of˺ this worldly life. But the life of this world, compared to the Hereafter, is nothing but a fleeting enjoyment
13|27|The disbelievers say, “If only a sign could be sent down to him from his Lord.” Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Indeed, God leaves to stray whoever He wills, and guides to Himself whoever turns to Him—
13|28|those who believe and whose hearts find comfort in the remembrance of God. Surely in the remembrance of God do hearts find comfort
13|29|Those who believe and do good, for them will be bliss and an honourable destination.”
13|30|And so We have sent you ˹O Prophet˺ to a community, like ˹We did with˺ earlier communities, so that you may recite to them what We have revealed to you. Yet they deny the Most Compassionate. Say, “He is my Lord! There is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him. In Him I put my trust, and to Him I turn ˹in repentance˺.”
13|31|If there were a recitation that could cause mountains to move, or the earth to split, or the dead to speak, ˹it would have been this Quran˺. But all matters are by God’s Will. Have the believers not yet realized that had God willed, He could have guided all of humanity? And disasters will continue to afflict the disbelievers or strike close to their homes for their misdeeds, until God’s promise comes to pass. Surely God never fails in His promise
13|32|Other messengers had already been ridiculed before you, but I delayed the disbelievers ˹for a while˺ then seized them. And how ˹horrible˺ was My punishment
13|33|Is ˹there any equal to˺ the Vigilant One Who knows what every soul commits? Yet the pagans have associated others with God ˹in worship˺. Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Name them! Or do you ˹mean to˺ inform Him of something He does not know on the earth? Or are these ˹gods˺ just empty words?” In fact, the disbelievers’ falsehood has been made so appealing to them that they have been turned away from the Path. And whoever God leaves to stray will be left with no guide
13|34|For them is punishment in this worldly life, but the punishment of the Hereafter is truly far worse. And none can shield them from God
13|35|The description of the Paradise promised to the righteous is that under it rivers flow; eternal is its fruit as well as its shade. That is the ˹ultimate˺ outcome for the righteous. But the outcome for the disbelievers is the Fire
13|36|˹The believers among˺ those who were given the Scripture rejoice at what has been revealed to you ˹O Prophet˺, while some ˹disbelieving˺ factions deny a portion of it. Say, “I have only been commanded to worship God, associating none with Him ˹in worship˺. To Him I invite ˹all˺, and to Him is my return.”
13|37|And so We have revealed it as an authority in Arabic. And if you were to follow their desires after ˹all˺ the knowledge that has come to you, there would be none to protect or shield you from God
13|38|We have certainly sent messengers before you ˹O Prophet˺ and blessed them with wives and offspring. It was not for any messenger to bring a sign without God’s permission. Every destined matter has a ˹set˺ time
13|39|God eliminates and confirms what He wills, and with Him is the Master Record
13|40|Whether We show you ˹O Prophet˺ some of what We threaten them with, or cause you to die ˹before that˺, your duty is only to deliver ˹the message˺. Judgment is for Us
13|41|Do they not see that We gradually reduce their land from its borders? God decides—none can reverse His decision. And He is swift in reckoning
13|42|Those ˹disbelievers˺ before them ˹secretly˺ planned, but God has the ultimate plan. He knows what every soul commits. And the disbelievers will soon know who will have the ultimate outcome
13|43|The disbelievers say, “You ˹Muḥammad˺ are no messenger.” Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “God is sufficient as a Witness between me and you, as is whoever has knowledge of the Scripture.”
14|1|Alif-Lãm-Ra. ˹This is˺ a Book which We have revealed to you ˹O Prophet˺ so that you may lead people out of darkness and into light, by the Will of their Lord, to the Path of the Almighty, the Praiseworthy—
14|2|God, to Whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. And woe to the disbelievers because of a severe torment
14|3|˹They are˺ the ones who favour the life of this world over the Hereafter and hinder ˹others˺ from the Way of God, striving to make it ˹appear˺ crooked. It is they who have gone far astray
14|4|We have not sent a messenger except in the language of his people to clarify ˹the message˺ for them. Then God leaves whoever He wills to stray and guides whoever He wills. And He is the Almighty, All-Wise
14|5|Indeed, We sent Moses with Our signs, ˹ordering him,˺ “Lead your people out of darkness and into light, and remind them of God’s days ˹of favour˺.” Surely in this are signs for whoever is steadfast, grateful
14|6|˹Consider˺ when Moses said to his people, “Remember God’s favour upon you when He rescued you from the people of Pharaoh, who afflicted you with dreadful torment—slaughtering your sons and keeping your women. That was a severe test from your Lord
14|7|And ˹remember˺ when your Lord proclaimed, ‘If you are grateful, I will certainly give you more. But if you are ungrateful, surely My punishment is severe.’”
14|8|Moses added, “If you along with everyone on earth were to be ungrateful, then ˹know that˺ God is indeed Self-Sufficient, Praiseworthy.”
14|9|Have you not ˹already˺ received the stories of those who were before you: the people of Noah, ’Âd, Thamûd, and those after them? Only God knows how many they were. Their messengers came to them with clear proofs, but they put their hands over their mouths and said, “We totally reject what you have been sent with, and we are certainly in alarming doubt about what you are inviting us to.”
14|10|Their messengers asked ˹them˺, “Is there any doubt about God, the Originator of the heavens and the earth? He is inviting you in order to forgive your sins, and delay your end until your appointed term.” They argued, “You are no more than humans like us! You ˹only˺ wish to turn us away from what our forefathers worshipped. So bring us some compelling proof.”
14|11|Their messengers said to them, “We are ˹indeed˺ only humans like you, but God favours whoever He chooses of His servants. It is not for us to bring you any proof without God’s permission. And in God let the believers put their trust
14|12|Why should we not put our trust in God, when He has truly guided us to ˹the very best of˺ ways? Indeed, we will patiently endure whatever harm you may cause us. And in God let the faithful put their trust.”
14|13|The disbelievers then threatened their messengers, “We will certainly expel you from our land, unless you return to our faith.” So their Lord revealed to them, “We will surely destroy the wrongdoers
14|14|and make you reside in the land after them. This is for whoever is in awe of standing before Me and fears My warning.”
14|15|And both sides called for judgment, so every stubborn tyrant was doomed
14|16|Awaiting them is Hell, and they will be left to drink oozing pus
14|17|which they will sip with difficulty, and can hardly swallow. Death will overwhelm them from every side, yet they will not ˹be able to˺ die. Awaiting them still is harsher torment
14|18|The parable of the deeds of those who disbelieve in their Lord is that of ashes fiercely blown away by wind on a stormy day. They will gain nothing from what they have earned. That is ˹truly˺ the farthest one can stray
14|19|Have you not seen that God created the heavens and the earth for a reason? If He wills, He can eliminate you and produce a new creation
14|20|And that is not difficult for God ˹at all˺
14|21|They will all appear before God, and the lowly ˹followers˺ will appeal to the arrogant ˹leaders˺, “We were your ˹dedicated˺ followers, so will you ˹then˺ protect us from God’s torment in any way?” They will reply, “Had God guided us, we would have guided you. ˹Now˺ it is all the same for us whether we suffer patiently or impatiently, there is no escape for us.”
14|22|And Satan will say ˹to his followers˺ after the judgment has been passed, “Indeed, God has made you a true promise. I too made you a promise, but I failed you. I did not have any authority over you. I only called you, and you responded to me. So do not blame me; blame yourselves. I cannot save you, nor can you save me. Indeed, I denounce your previous association of me with God ˹in loyalty˺. Surely the wrongdoers will suffer a painful punishment.”
14|23|Those who believe and do good will be admitted into Gardens, under which rivers flow—to stay there forever by the Will of their Lord—where they will be greeted with “Peace!”
14|24|Do you not see how God compares a good word to a good tree? Its root is firm and its branches reach the sky
14|25|˹always˺ yielding its fruit in every season by the Will of its Lord. This is how God sets forth parables for the people, so perhaps they will be mindful
14|26|And the parable of an evil word is that of an evil tree, uprooted from the earth, having no stability
14|27|God makes the believers steadfast with the firm Word ˹of faith˺ in this worldly life and the Hereafter. And God leaves the wrongdoers to stray. For God does what He wills
14|28|Have you not seen those ˹disbelievers˺ who meet God’s favours with ingratitude and lead their own people to their doom
14|29|In Hell they will burn. What an evil place for settlement
14|30|They set up equals to God to mislead ˹others˺ from His Way. Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Enjoy yourselves! Surely your destination is the Fire.”
14|31|Tell My believing servants to establish prayer and donate from what We have provided for them—openly and secretly—before the arrival of a Day in which there will be no ransom or friendly connections
14|32|It is God Who created the heavens and the earth and sends down rain from the sky, causing fruits to grow as a provision for you. He has subjected the ships for your service, sailing through the sea by His command, and has subjected the rivers for you
14|33|He has ˹also˺ subjected for you the sun and the moon, both constantly orbiting, and has subjected the day and night for you
14|34|And He has granted you all that you asked Him for. If you tried to count God’s blessings, you would never be able to number them. Indeed humankind is truly unfair, ˹totally˺ ungrateful
14|35|˹Remember˺ when Abraham prayed, “My Lord! Make this city ˹of Mecca˺ secure, and keep me and my children away from the worship of idols
14|36|My Lord! They have caused many people to go astray. So whoever follows me is with me, and whoever disobeys me—then surely You are ˹still˺ All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
14|37|Our Lord! I have settled some of my offspring in a barren valley, near Your Sacred House, our Lord, so that they may establish prayer. So make the hearts of ˹believing˺ people incline towards them and provide them with fruits, so perhaps they will be thankful
14|38|Our Lord! You certainly know what we conceal and what we reveal. Nothing on earth or in heaven is hidden from God
14|39|All praise is for God who has blessed me with Ishmael and Isaac in my old age. My Lord is indeed the Hearer of ˹all˺ prayers
14|40|My Lord! Make me and those ˹believers˺ of my descendants keep up prayer. Our Lord! Accept my prayers
14|41|Our Lord! Forgive me, my parents, and the believers on the Day when the judgment will come to pass.”
14|42|Do not think ˹O Prophet˺ that God is unaware of what the wrongdoers do. He only delays them until a Day when ˹their˺ eyes will stare in horror—
14|43|rushing forth, heads raised, never blinking, hearts void
14|44|And warn the people of the Day when the punishment will overtake ˹the wicked among˺ them, and the wrongdoers will cry, “Our Lord! Delay us for a little while. We will respond to Your call and follow the messengers!” ˹It will be said,˺ “Did you not swear before that you would never be removed ˹to the next life˺?”
14|45|You passed by the ruins of those ˹destroyed peoples˺ who had wronged themselves. It was made clear to you how We dealt with them, and We gave you ˹many˺ examples
14|46|They devised every plot, which was fully known to God, but their plotting was not enough to ˹even˺ overpower mountains ˹let alone God˺
14|47|So do not think ˹O Prophet˺ that God will fail to keep His promise to His messengers. God is indeed Almighty, capable of punishment
14|48|˹Watch for˺ the Day ˹when˺ the earth will be changed into a different earth and the heavens as well, and all will appear before God—the One, the Supreme
14|49|On that Day you will see the wicked bound together in chains
14|50|with garments of tar, and their faces covered with flames
14|51|As such, God will reward every soul for what it has committed. Surely God is swift in reckoning
14|52|This ˹Quran˺ is a ˹sufficient˺ message for humanity so that they may take it as a warning and know that there is only One God, and so that people of reason may be mindful
15|1|Alif-Lãm-Ra. These are the verses of the Book; the clear Quran
15|2|˹The day will come when˺ the disbelievers will certainly wish they had submitted ˹to God˺
15|3|˹So˺ let them eat and enjoy themselves and be diverted by ˹false˺ hope, for they will soon know
15|4|We have never destroyed a society without a destined term
15|5|No people can advance their doom, nor can they delay it
15|6|They say, “O you to whom the Reminder is revealed! You must be insane
15|7|Why do you not bring us the angels, if what you say is true?”
15|8|We do not send the angels down except for a just cause, and then ˹the end of˺ the disbelievers will not be delayed
15|9|It is certainly We Who have revealed the Reminder, and it is certainly We Who will preserve it
15|10|Indeed, We sent messengers before you ˹O Prophet˺ among the groups of early peoples
15|11|but no messenger ever came to them without being mocked
15|12|This is how We allow disbelief ˹to steep˺ into the hearts of the wicked
15|13|They would not believe in this ˹Quran˺ despite the ˹many˺ examples of those ˹destroyed˺ before
15|14|And even if We opened for them a gate to heaven, through which they continued to ascend
15|15|still they would say, “Our eyes have truly been dazzled! In fact, we must have been bewitched.”
15|16|Indeed, We have placed constellations in the sky, and adorned it for all to see
15|17|And We protected it from every accursed devil
15|18|except the one eavesdropping, who is then pursued by a visible flare
15|19|As for the earth, We spread it out and placed upon it firm mountains, and caused everything to grow there in perfect balance
15|20|And We made in it means of sustenance for you and others, who you do not provide for
15|21|There is not any means ˹of sustenance˺ whose reserves We do not hold, only bringing it forth in precise measure
15|22|We send fertilizing winds, and bring down rain from the sky for you to drink. It is not you who hold its reserves
15|23|Surely it is We Who give life and cause death. And We are the ˹Eternal˺ Successor
15|24|We certainly know those who have gone before you and those who will come after ˹you˺
15|25|Surely your Lord ˹alone˺ will gather them together ˹for judgment˺. He is truly All-Wise, All-Knowing
15|26|Indeed, We created man from sounding clay moulded from black mud
15|27|As for the jinn, We created them earlier from smokeless fire
15|28|˹Remember, O Prophet˺ when your Lord said to the angels, “I am going to create a human being from sounding clay moulded from black mud
15|29|So when I have fashioned him and had a spirit of My Own ˹creation˺ breathed into him, fall down in prostration to him.”
15|30|So the angels prostrated all together—
15|31|but not Iblîs, who refused to prostrate with the others
15|32|God asked, “O Iblîs! What is the matter with you that you did not join others in prostration?”
15|33|He replied, “It is not for me to prostrate to a human You created from sounding clay moulded from black mud.”
15|34|God commanded, “Then get out of Paradise, for you are truly cursed
15|35|And surely upon you is condemnation until the Day of Judgment.”
15|36|Satan appealed, “My Lord! Then delay my end until the Day of their resurrection.”
15|37|God said, “You will be delayed
15|38|until the appointed Day.”
15|39|Satan responded, “My Lord! For allowing me to stray I will surely tempt them on earth and mislead them all together
15|40|except Your chosen servants among them.”
15|41|God said, “This is the Way, binding on Me
15|42|you will certainly have no authority over My servants, except the deviant who follow you
15|43|and surely Hell is their destined place, all together
15|44|It has seven gates, to each a group of them is designated.”
15|45|Indeed, the righteous will be amid Gardens and springs
15|46|˹It will be said to them,˺ “Enter in peace and security.”
15|47|We will remove whatever bitterness they had in their hearts. In a friendly manner, they will be on thrones, facing one another
15|48|No fatigue will touch them there, nor will they ever be asked to leave
15|49|Inform My servants ˹O Prophet˺ that I am truly the All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
15|50|and that My torment is indeed the most painful
15|51|And inform them ˹O Prophet˺ about Abraham’s guests
15|52|who entered upon him and greeted ˹him with˺, “Peace!” He ˹later˺ said, “Surely we are afraid of you.”
15|53|They reassured ˹him˺, “Do not be afraid! Surely we give you good news of a knowledgeable son.”
15|54|He wondered, “Do you give me good news despite my old age? What unlikely news!”
15|55|They responded, “We give you good news in all truth, so do not be one of those who despair.”
15|56|He exclaimed, “Who would despair of the mercy of their Lord except the misguided?”
15|57|He ˹then˺ added, “What is your mission, O messenger-angels?”
15|58|They replied, “We have actually been sent to a wicked people
15|59|As for the family of Lot, we will certainly deliver them all
15|60|except his wife. We have determined that she will be one of the doomed.”
15|61|So when the messengers came to the family of Lot
15|62|he said, “You are surely an unfamiliar people!”
15|63|They responded, “We have come to you with that ˹torment˺ which they have doubted
15|64|We come to you with the truth, and we are certainly truthful
15|65|So travel with your family in the dark of night, and follow ˹closely˺ behind them. Do not let any of you look back, and go where you are commanded.”
15|66|We revealed to him this decree: “Those ˹sinners˺ will be uprooted in the morning.”
15|67|And there came the men of the city, rejoicing
15|68|Lot pleaded, “Indeed, these are my guests, so do not embarrass me
15|69|Fear God and do not humiliate me.”
15|70|They responded, “Have we not forbidden you from protecting anyone?”
15|71|He said, “O my people! Here are my daughters ˹so marry them˺ if you wish to do so.”
15|72|By your life ˹O Prophet˺, they certainly wandered blindly, intoxicated ˹by lust˺
15|73|So the ˹mighty˺ blast overtook them at sunrise
15|74|And We turned the cities ˹of Sodom and Gomorrah˺ upside down and rained upon them stones of baked clay
15|75|Surely in this are signs for those who contemplate
15|76|Their ruins still lie along a known route
15|77|Surely in this is a sign for those who believe
15|78|And the residents of the Forest were truly wrongdoers
15|79|so We inflicted punishment upon them. The ruins of both nations still lie on a well-known road
15|80|Indeed, the residents of the Stone Valley also denied the messengers
15|81|We gave them Our signs, but they turned away from them
15|82|They carved their homes in the mountains, feeling secure
15|83|But the ˹mighty˺ blast overtook them in the morning
15|84|and all they achieved was of no help to them
15|85|We have not created the heavens and the earth and everything in between except for a purpose. And the Hour is certain to come, so forgive graciously
15|86|Surely your Lord is the Master Creator, All-Knowing
15|87|We have certainly granted you the seven often-repeated verses and the great Quran
15|88|Do not let your eyes crave the ˹fleeting˺ pleasures We have provided for some of the disbelievers, nor grieve for them. And be gracious to the believers
15|89|And say, “I am truly sent with a clear warning”—
15|90|˹a warning˺ similar to what We sent to those who divided ˹the Scriptures˺
15|91|who ˹now˺ accept parts of the Quran, rejecting others
15|92|So by your Lord! We will certainly question them all
15|93|about what they used to do
15|94|So proclaim what you have been commanded, and turn away from the polytheists
15|95|Surely We will be sufficient for you against the mockers
15|96|who set up ˹other˺ gods with God. They will soon come to know
15|97|We certainly know that your heart is truly distressed by what they say
15|98|So glorify the praises of your Lord and be one of those who ˹always˺ pray
15|99|and worship your Lord until the inevitable comes your way
16|1|The command of God is at hand, so do not hasten it. Glorified and Exalted is He above what they associate ˹with Him in worship˺
16|2|He sends down the angels with revelation by His command to whoever He wills of His servants, ˹stating:˺ “Warn ˹humanity˺ that there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Me, so be mindful of Me ˹alone˺.”
16|3|He created the heavens and the earth for a purpose. Exalted is He above what they associate with Him ˹in worship˺
16|4|He created humans from a sperm-drop, then—behold!—they openly challenge ˹Him˺
16|5|And He created the cattle for you as a source of warmth, food, and ˹many other˺ benefits
16|6|They are also pleasing to you when you bring them home and when you take them out to graze
16|7|And they carry your loads to ˹distant˺ lands which you could not otherwise reach without great hardship. Surely your Lord is Ever Gracious, Most Merciful
16|8|˹He also created˺ horses, mules, and donkeys for your transportation and adornment. And He creates what you do not know
16|9|It is upon God ˹alone˺ to ˹clearly˺ show the Straight Way. Other ways are deviant. Had He willed, He would have easily imposed guidance upon all of you
16|10|He is the One Who sends down rain from the sky, from which you drink and by which plants grow for your cattle to graze
16|11|With it He produces for you ˹various˺ crops, olives, palm trees, grapevines, and every type of fruit. Surely in this is a sign for those who reflect
16|12|And He has subjected for your benefit the day and the night, the sun and the moon. And the stars have been subjected by His command. Surely in this are signs for those who understand
16|13|And ˹He subjected˺ for you whatever He has created on earth of varying colours. Surely in this is a sign for those who are mindful
16|14|And He is the One Who has subjected the sea, so from it you may eat tender seafood and extract ornaments to wear. And you see the ships ploughing their way through it, so you may seek His bounty and give thanks ˹to Him˺
16|15|He has placed into the earth firm mountains, so it does not shake with you, as well as rivers, and pathways so you may find your way
16|16|Also by landmarks and stars do people find their way
16|17|Can the One Who creates be equal to those who do not? Will you not then be mindful
16|18|If you tried to count God’s blessings, you would never be able to number them. Surely God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
16|19|And God knows what you conceal and what you reveal
16|20|But those ˹idols˺ they invoke besides God cannot create anything—they themselves are created
16|21|They are dead, not alive—not even knowing when their followers will be resurrected
16|22|Your God is ˹only˺ One God. As for those who do not believe in the Hereafter, their hearts are in denial, and they are too proud
16|23|Without a doubt, God knows what they conceal and what they reveal. He certainly does not like those who are too proud
16|24|And when it is said to them, “What has your Lord revealed?” They say, “Ancient fables!”
16|25|Let them bear their burdens in full on the Day of Judgment as well as some of the burdens of those they mislead without knowledge. Evil indeed is what they will bear
16|26|Indeed, those before them had plotted, but God struck at the ˹very˺ foundation of their structure, so the roof collapsed on top of them, and the torment came upon them from where they did not expect
16|27|Then on the Day of Judgment He will humiliate them and say, “Where are My ˹so-called˺ associate-gods for whose sake you used to oppose ˹the believers˺?” Those gifted with knowledge will say, “Surely disgrace and misery today are upon the disbelievers.”
16|28|Those whose souls the angels seize while they wrong themselves will then offer ˹full˺ submission ˹and say falsely,˺ “We did not do any evil.” ˹The angels will say,˺ “No! Surely God fully knows what you used to do
16|29|So enter the gates of Hell, to stay there forever. Indeed, what an evil home for the arrogant!”
16|30|And ˹when˺ it is said to those mindful ˹of God˺, “What has your Lord revealed?” They say, “All the best!” For those who do good in this world, there is goodness. But far better is the ˹eternal˺ Home of the Hereafter. How excellent indeed is the home of the righteous
16|31|the Gardens of Eternity which they will enter, under which rivers flow. In it they will have whatever they desire. This is how God rewards the righteous—
16|32|those whose souls the angels take while they are virtuous, saying ˹to them˺, “Peace be upon you! Enter Paradise for what you used to do.”
16|33|Are they only awaiting the coming of the angels or the command of your Lord ˹O Prophet˺? So were those before them. And God never wronged them, but it was they who wronged themselves
16|34|Then the evil ˹consequences˺ of their deeds overtook them, and they were overwhelmed by what they used to ridicule
16|35|The polytheists argue, “Had God willed, neither we nor our forefathers would have worshipped anything other than Him, nor prohibited anything without His command.” So did those before them. Is not the messengers’ duty only to deliver ˹the message˺ clearly
16|36|We surely sent a messenger to every community, saying, “Worship God and shun false gods.” But some of them were guided by God, while others were destined to stray. So travel throughout the land and see the fate of the deniers
16|37|Even though you ˹O Prophet˺ are keen on their guidance, God certainly does not guide those He leaves to stray, and they will have no helpers
16|38|They swear by God their most solemn oaths that God will never raise the dead to life. Yes ˹He will˺! It is a true promise binding on Him, but most people do not know
16|39|˹He will do that˺ to make clear to them what they disagreed on, and for the disbelievers to know that they were liars
16|40|If We ever will something ˹to exist˺, all We say is: “Be!” And it is
16|41|As for those who emigrated in ˹the cause of˺ God after being persecuted, We will surely bless them with a good home in this world. But the reward of the Hereafter is far better, if only they knew
16|42|˹It is˺ they who have patiently endured, and in their Lord they put their trust
16|43|We did not send ˹messengers˺ before you ˹O Prophet˺ except mere men inspired by Us. If you ˹polytheists˺ do not know ˹this already˺, then ask those who have knowledge ˹of the Scriptures˺
16|44|˹We sent them˺ with clear proofs and divine Books. And We have sent down to you ˹O Prophet˺ the Reminder, so that you may explain to people what has been revealed for them, and perhaps they will reflect
16|45|Do those who devise evil plots feel secure that God will not cause the earth to swallow them? Or that the torment will not come upon them in ways they cannot comprehend
16|46|Or that He will not seize them while they go about ˹their day˺, for then they will have no escape
16|47|Or that He will not destroy them gradually? But your Lord is truly Ever Gracious, Most Merciful
16|48|Have they not considered how the shadows of everything God has created incline to the right and the left ˹as the sun moves˺, totally submitting to God in all humility
16|49|And to God ˹alone˺ bows down ˹in submission˺ whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth of living creatures, as do the angels—who are not too proud ˹to do so˺
16|50|They fear their Lord above them, and do whatever they are commanded
16|51|And God has said, “Do not take two gods. There is only One God. So be in awe of Me ˹alone˺.”
16|52|To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth, and to Him ˹alone˺ is the everlasting devotion. Will you then fear any other than God
16|53|Whatever blessings you have are from God. Then whenever hardship touches you, to Him ˹alone˺ you cry ˹for help˺
16|54|Then as soon as He removes the hardship from you, a group of you associates ˹others˺ with their Lord ˹in worship˺
16|55|only returning Our favours with ingratitude. So enjoy yourselves, for you will soon know
16|56|And they ˹even˺ assign to those ˹idols˺—who know nothing—a share of what We have provided for them. By God! You will certainly be questioned about whatever ˹lies˺ you used to fabricate ˹against God˺
16|57|And they attribute ˹angels as˺ daughters to God—glory be to Him!—the opposite of what they desire for themselves
16|58|Whenever one of them is given the good news of a baby girl, his face grows gloomy, as he suppresses his rage
16|59|He hides himself from the people because of the bad news he has received. Should he keep her in disgrace, or bury her ˹alive˺ in the ground? Evil indeed is their judgment
16|60|To those who disbelieve in the Hereafter belong all evil qualities, whereas to God belong the finest attributes. And He is the Almighty, All-Wise
16|61|If God were to punish people ˹immediately˺ for their wrongdoing, He would not have left a single living being on earth. But He delays them for an appointed term. And when their time arrives, they cannot delay it for a moment, nor could they advance it
16|62|They attribute to God what they hate ˹for themselves˺, and their tongues utter the lie that they will have the finest reward. Without a doubt, for them is the Fire, where they will be abandoned
16|63|By God! We have surely sent messengers to communities before you ˹O Prophet˺, but Satan made their misdeeds appealing to them. So he is their patron today, and they will suffer a painful punishment
16|64|We have revealed to you the Book only to clarify for them what they differed about, and as a guide and mercy for those who believe
16|65|And God sends down rain from the sky, giving life to the earth after its death. Surely in this is a sign for those who listen
16|66|And there is certainly a lesson for you in cattle: We give you to drink of what is in their bellies, from between digested food and blood: pure milk, pleasant to drink
16|67|And from the fruits of palm trees and grapevines you derive intoxicants as well as wholesome provision. Surely in this is a sign for those who understand
16|68|And your Lord inspired the bees: “Make ˹your˺ homes in the mountains, the trees, and in what people construct
16|69|and feed from ˹the flower of˺ any fruit ˹you please˺ and follow the ways your Lord has made easy for you.” From their bellies comes forth liquid of varying colours, in which there is healing for people. Surely in this is a sign for those who reflect
16|70|God has created you, and then causes you to die. And some of you are left to reach the most feeble stage of life so that they may know nothing after having known much. Indeed, God is All-Knowing, Most Capable
16|71|And God has favoured some of you over others in provision. But those who have been much favoured would not share their wealth with those ˹bondspeople˺ in their possession, making them their equals. Do they then deny God’s favours
16|72|And God has made for you spouses of your own kind, and given you through your spouses children and grandchildren. And He has granted you good, lawful provisions. Are they then faithful to falsehood and ungrateful for God’s favours
16|73|Yet they worship besides God those ˹idols˺ who do not afford them any provision from the heavens and the earth, nor do they have the power to
16|74|So do not set up equals to God, for God certainly knows and you do not know
16|75|God sets forth a parable: a slave who lacks all means, compared to a ˹free˺ man to whom We granted a good provision, of which he donates ˹freely,˺ openly and secretly. Are they equal? Praise be to God. In fact, most of them do not know
16|76|And God sets forth a parable of two men: one of them is dumb, incapable of anything. He is a burden on his master. Wherever he is sent, he brings no good. Can such a person be equal to the one who commands justice and is on the Straight Path
16|77|To God ˹alone˺ belongs ˹the knowledge of˺ the unseen in the heavens and the earth. Bringing about the Hour would only take the blink of an eye, or even less. Surely God is Most Capable of everything
16|78|And God brought you out of the wombs of your mothers while you knew nothing, and gave you hearing, sight, and intellect so perhaps you would be thankful
16|79|Have they not seen the birds glide in the open sky? None holds them up except God. Surely in this are signs for those who believe
16|80|And God has made your homes a place to rest, and has given you tents from the hide of animals, light to handle when you travel and when you camp. And out of their wool, fur, and hair He has given you furnishings and goods for a while
16|81|And God has provided you shade out of what He created, and has given you shelter in the mountains. He has also provided you with clothes protecting you from the heat ˹and cold˺, and armour shielding you in battle. This is how He perfects His favour upon you, so perhaps you will ˹fully˺ submit ˹to Him˺
16|82|But if they turn away, then your duty ˹O Prophet˺ is only to deliver ˹the message˺ clearly
16|83|They are aware of God’s favours, but still deny them. And most of them are ˹truly˺ ungrateful
16|84|˹Consider, O Prophet,˺ the Day We will call ˹a prophet as˺ a witness from every faith-community. Then the disbelievers will neither be allowed to plead nor appease ˹their Lord˺
16|85|And when the wrongdoers face the punishment, it will not be lightened for them, nor will they be delayed ˹from it˺
16|86|And when the polytheists see their associate-gods, they will say, “Our Lord! These are our associate-gods that we used to invoke besides You.” Their gods will throw a rebuttal at them, ˹saying,˺ “You are definitely liars.”
16|87|They will offer ˹full˺ submission to God on that Day, and whatever ˹gods˺ they fabricated will fail them
16|88|For those who disbelieve and hinder ˹others˺ from the Way of God, We will add more punishment to their punishment for all the corruption they spread
16|89|˹Consider, O Prophet,˺ the Day We will call against every faith-community a witness of their own. And We will call you to be a witness against these ˹people of yours˺. We have revealed to you the Book as an explanation of all things, a guide, a mercy, and good news for those who ˹fully˺ submit
16|90|Indeed, God commands justice, grace, as well as courtesy to close relatives. He forbids indecency, wickedness, and aggression. He instructs you so perhaps you will be mindful
16|91|Honour God’s covenant when you make a pledge, and do not break your oaths after confirming them, having made God your guarantor. Surely God knows all you do
16|92|Do not be like the woman who ˹foolishly˺ unravels her yarn after it is firmly spun, by taking your oaths as a means of deceiving one another in favour of a stronger group. Surely God tests you through this. And on the Day of Judgment He will certainly make your differences clear to you
16|93|Had God willed, He could have easily made you one community ˹of believers˺, but He leaves to stray whoever He wills and guides whoever He wills. And you will certainly be questioned about what you used to do
16|94|And do not take your oaths as a means of deceiving one another or your feet will slip after they have been firm. Then you will taste the evil ˹consequences˺ of hindering ˹others˺ from the Way of God, and you will suffer a tremendous punishment
16|95|And do not trade God’s covenant for a fleeting gain. What is with God is certainly far better for you, if only you knew
16|96|Whatever you have will end, but whatever God has is everlasting. And We will certainly reward the steadfast according to the best of their deeds
16|97|Whoever does good, whether male or female, and is a believer, We will surely bless them with a good life, and We will certainly reward them according to the best of their deeds
16|98|When you recite the Quran, seek refuge with God from Satan, the accursed
16|99|He certainly has no authority over those who believe and put their trust in their Lord
16|100|His authority is only over those who take him as a patron and who—under his influence—associate ˹others˺ with God ˹in worship˺
16|101|When We replace a verse with another—and God knows best what He reveals—they say, “You ˹Muḥammad˺ are just a fabricator.” In fact, most of them do not know
16|102|Say, “The holy spirit has brought it down from your Lord with the truth to reassure the believers, and as a guide and good news for those who submit ˹to God˺.”
16|103|And We surely know that they say, “No one is teaching him except a human.” But the man they refer to speaks a foreign tongue, whereas this ˹Quran˺ is ˹in˺ eloquent Arabic
16|104|Surely those who do not believe in God’s revelations will never be guided by God, and they will suffer a painful punishment
16|105|No one fabricates lies except those who disbelieve in God’s revelations, and it is they who are the ˹true˺ liars
16|106|Whoever disbelieves in God after their belief—not those who are forced while their hearts are firm in faith, but those who embrace disbelief wholeheartedly—they will be condemned by God and suffer a tremendous punishment
16|107|This is because they prefer the life of this world over the Hereafter. Surely God never guides those who ˹choose to˺ disbelieve
16|108|They are the ones whose hearts, ears, and eyes are sealed by God, and it is they who are ˹truly˺ heedless
16|109|Without a doubt, they will be the losers in the Hereafter
16|110|As for those who emigrated after being compelled ˹to renounce Islam˺, then struggled ˹in God’s cause˺, and persevered, your Lord ˹O Prophet˺ is truly All-Forgiving, Most Merciful after all
16|111|˹Consider˺ the Day ˹when˺ every soul will come pleading for itself, and each will be paid in full for what it did, and none will be wronged
16|112|And God sets forth the example of a society which was safe and at ease, receiving its provision in abundance from all directions. But its people met God’s favours with ingratitude, so God made them taste the clutches of hunger and fear for their misdeeds
16|113|A messenger of their own actually did come to them, but they denied him. So the torment overtook them while they persisted in wrongdoing
16|114|So eat from the good, lawful things which God has provided for you, and be grateful for God’s favours, if you ˹truly˺ worship Him ˹alone˺
16|115|He has only forbidden you ˹to eat˺ carrion, blood, swine, and what is slaughtered in the name of any other than God. But if someone is compelled by necessity—neither driven by desire nor exceeding immediate need—then surely God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
16|116|Do not falsely declare with your tongues, “This is lawful, and that is unlawful,” ˹only˺ fabricating lies against God. Indeed, those who fabricate lies against God will never succeed
16|117|˹It is only˺ a brief enjoyment, then they will suffer a painful punishment
16|118|To the Jews, We have forbidden what We related to you before. We did not wrong them, but it was they who wronged themselves
16|119|As for those who commit evil ignorantly ˹or recklessly˺, then repent afterwards and mend their ways, then your Lord is surely All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
16|120|Indeed, Abraham was a model of excellence: devoted to God, ˹perfectly˺ upright—not a polytheist—
16|121|˹utterly˺ grateful for God’s favours. ˹So˺ He chose him and guided him to the Straight Path
16|122|We blessed him with all goodness in this world, and in the Hereafter he will certainly be among the righteous
16|123|Then We revealed to you ˹O Prophet, saying˺: “Follow the faith of Abraham, the upright, who was not one of the polytheists.”
16|124|˹Honouring˺ the Sabbath was ordained only for those who disputed about Abraham. And surely your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Judgment regarding their disputes
16|125|Invite ˹all˺ to the Way of your Lord with wisdom and kind advice, and only debate with them in the best manner. Surely your Lord ˹alone˺ knows best who has strayed from His Way and who is ˹rightly˺ guided
16|126|If you retaliate, then let it be equivalent to what you have suffered. But if you patiently endure, it is certainly best for those who are patient
16|127|Be patient ˹O Prophet˺, for your patience is only with God’s help. Do not grieve over those ˹who disbelieve˺, nor be distressed by their schemes
16|128|Surely God is with those who shun evil and who do good ˹deeds˺
17|1|Glory be to the One Who took His servant ˹Muḥammad˺ by night from the Sacred Mosque to the Farthest Mosque whose surroundings We have blessed, so that We may show him some of Our signs. Indeed, He alone is the All-Hearing, All-Seeing
17|2|And We gave Moses the Scripture and made it a guide for the Children of Israel, ˹stating:˺ “Do not take besides Me any other Trustee of Affairs
17|3|˹O˺ descendants of those We carried with Noah ˹in the Ark˺! He was indeed a grateful servant.”
17|4|And We warned the Children of Israel in the Scripture, “You will certainly cause corruption in the land twice, and you will become extremely arrogant
17|5|When the first of the two warnings would come to pass, We would send against you some of Our servants of great might, who would ravage your homes. This would be a warning fulfilled
17|6|Then ˹after your repentance˺ We would give you the upper hand over them and aid you with wealth and offspring, causing you to outnumber them
17|7|If you act rightly, it is for your own good, but if you do wrong, it is to your own loss. “And when the second warning would come to pass, your enemies would ˹be left to˺ totally disgrace you and enter the Temple ˹of Jerusalem˺ as they entered it the first time, and utterly destroy whatever would fall into their hands
17|8|Perhaps your Lord will have mercy on you ˹if you repent˺, but if you return ˹to sin˺, We will return ˹to punishment˺. And We have made Hell a ˹permanent˺ confinement for the disbelievers.”
17|9|Surely this Quran guides to what is most upright, and gives good news to the believers—who do good—that they will have a mighty reward
17|10|And ˹it warns˺ those who do not believe in the Hereafter ˹that˺ We have prepared for them a painful punishment
17|11|And humans ˹swiftly˺ pray for evil as they pray for good. For humankind is ever hasty
17|12|We made the day and night as two signs. So We made the sign of the night devoid of light, and We made the sign of the day ˹perfectly˺ bright, so that you may seek the bounty of your Lord and know the number of years and calculation ˹of time˺. And We have explained everything in detail
17|13|We have bound every human’s destiny to their neck. And on the Day of Judgment We will bring forth to each ˹person˺ a record which they will find laid open
17|14|˹And it will be said,˺ “Read your record. You ˹alone˺ are sufficient this Day to take account of yourself.”
17|15|Whoever chooses to be guided, it is only for their own good. And whoever chooses to stray, it is only to their own loss. No soul burdened with sin will bear the burden of another. And We would never punish ˹a people˺ until We have sent a messenger ˹to warn them˺
17|16|Whenever We intend to destroy a society, We command its elite ˹to obey God˺ but they act rebelliously in it. So the decree ˹of punishment˺ is justified, and We destroy it utterly
17|17|˹Imagine˺ how many peoples We have destroyed after Noah! And sufficient is your Lord as All-Aware and All-Seeing of the sins of His servants
17|18|Whoever desires this fleeting world ˹alone˺, We hasten in it whatever We please to whoever We will; then We destine them for Hell, where they will burn, condemned and rejected
17|19|But whoever desires the Hereafter and strives for it accordingly, and is a ˹true˺ believer, it is they whose striving will be appreciated
17|20|We provide both the former and the latter from the bounty of your Lord. And the bounty of your Lord can never be withheld
17|21|See how We have favoured some over others ˹in this life˺, but the Hereafter is certainly far greater in rank and in favour
17|22|Do not set up any other god with God, or you will end up condemned, abandoned
17|23|For your Lord has decreed that you worship none but Him. And honour your parents. If one or both of them reach old age in your care, never say to them ˹even˺ ‘ugh,’ nor yell at them. Rather, address them respectfully
17|24|And be humble with them out of mercy, and pray, “My Lord! Be merciful to them as they raised me when I was young.”
17|25|Your Lord knows best what is within yourselves. If you are righteous, He is certainly All-Forgiving to those who ˹constantly˺ turn to Him
17|26|Give to close relatives their due, as well as the poor and ˹needy˺ travellers. And do not spend wastefully
17|27|Surely the wasteful are ˹like˺ brothers to the devils. And the Devil is ever ungrateful to his Lord
17|28|But if you must turn them down ˹because you lack the means to give˺—while hoping to receive your Lord’s bounty—then ˹at least˺ give them a kind word
17|29|Do not be so tight-fisted, for you will be blameworthy; nor so open-handed, for you will end up in poverty
17|30|Surely your Lord gives abundant or limited provisions to whoever He wills. He is certainly All-Aware, All-Seeing of His servants
17|31|Do not kill your children for fear of poverty. We provide for them and for you. Surely killing them is a heinous sin
17|32|Do not go near adultery. It is truly a shameful deed and an evil way
17|33|Do not take a ˹human˺ life—made sacred by God—except with ˹legal˺ right. If anyone is killed unjustly, We have given their heirs the authority, but do not let them exceed limits in retaliation, for they are already supported ˹by law˺
17|34|Do not come near the wealth of the orphan—unless intending to enhance it—until they attain maturity. Honour ˹your˺ pledges, for you will surely be accountable for them
17|35|Give in full when you measure, and weigh with an even balance. That is fairest and best in the end
17|36|Do not follow what you have no ˹sure˺ knowledge of. Indeed, all will be called to account for ˹their˺ hearing, sight, and intellect
17|37|And do not walk on the earth arrogantly. Surely you can neither crack the earth nor stretch to the height of the mountains
17|38|The violation of any of these ˹commandments˺ is detestable to your Lord
17|39|This is part of the wisdom which your Lord has revealed to you ˹O Prophet˺. And do not set up any other god with God ˹O humanity˺, or you will be cast into Hell, blameworthy, rejected
17|40|Has your Lord favoured you ˹pagans˺ with sons and taken angels as ˹His˺ daughters? You are truly making an outrageous claim
17|41|We have surely varied ˹the signs˺ in this Quran so perhaps they may be mindful, but it only drives them farther away
17|42|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Had there been other gods besides Him—as they claim—then they would have certainly sought a way to ˹challenge˺ the Lord of the Throne.”
17|43|Glorified and Highly Exalted is He above what they claim
17|44|The seven heavens, the earth, and all those in them glorify Him. There is not a single thing that does not glorify His praises—but you ˹simply˺ cannot comprehend their glorification. He is indeed Most Forbearing, All-Forgiving
17|45|When you ˹O Prophet˺ recite the Quran, We put a hidden barrier between you and those who do not believe in the Hereafter
17|46|We have cast veils over their hearts—leaving them unable to comprehend it—and deafness in their ears. And when you mention your Lord alone in the Quran, they turn their backs in aversion
17|47|We know best how they listen to your recitation and what they say privately—when the wrongdoers say, “You would only be following a bewitched man.”
17|48|See how they call you names ˹O Prophet˺! So they have gone so ˹far˺ astray that they cannot find the ˹Right˺ Way
17|49|And they say ˹mockingly˺, “When we are reduced to bones and ashes, will we really be raised as a new creation?”
17|50|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “˹Yes, even if˺ you become stones, or iron
17|51|or whatever you think is harder to bring to life!” Then they will ask ˹you˺, “Who will bring us back ˹to life˺?” Say, “The One Who created you the first time.” They will then shake their heads at you and ask, “When will that be?” Say, “Perhaps it is soon!”
17|52|On the Day He will call you, you will ˹instantly˺ respond by praising Him, thinking you had remained ˹in the world˺ only for a little while
17|53|Tell My ˹believing˺ servants to say only what is best. Satan certainly seeks to sow discord among them. Satan is indeed a sworn enemy to humankind
17|54|Your Lord knows you best. He may have mercy on you if He wills, or punish you if He wills. We have not sent you ˹O Prophet˺ as a keeper over them
17|55|Your Lord knows best all those in the heavens and the earth. And We have surely favoured some prophets above others, and to David We gave the Psalms
17|56|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Invoke those you claim ˹to be divine˺ besides Him—they do not have the power to undo harm from you or transfer it ˹to someone else˺.”
17|57|˹Even˺ the closest ˹to God˺ of those invoked would be seeking a way to their Lord, hoping for His mercy, and fearing His punishment. Indeed, your Lord’s torment is fearsome
17|58|There is not a ˹wicked˺ society that We will not destroy or punish with a severe torment before the Day of Judgment. That is written in the Record
17|59|Nothing keeps Us from sending the ˹demanded˺ signs except that they had ˹already˺ been denied by earlier peoples. And We gave Thamûd the she-camel as a clear sign, but they wrongfully rejected it. We only send the signs as a warning
17|60|And ˹remember, O Prophet˺ when We told you, “Certainly your Lord encompasses the people.” And We have made what We brought you to see as well as the cursed tree ˹mentioned˺ in the Quran only as a test for the people. We keep warning them, but it only increases them greatly in defiance
17|61|And ˹remember˺ when We said to the angels, “Prostrate before Adam,” so they all did—but not Iblîs, who protested, “Should I prostrate to the one You have created from mud?”
17|62|Adding, “Do you see this one you honoured above me? If you delay my end until the Day of Judgment, I will certainly take hold of his descendants, except for a few.”
17|63|God responded, “Be gone! Whoever of them follows you, Hell will surely be the reward for all of you—an ample reward
17|64|And incite whoever you can of them with your voice, mobilize against them all your cavalry and infantry, manipulate them in their wealth and children, and make them promises.” But Satan promises them nothing but delusion
17|65|˹God added,˺ “You will truly have no authority over My ˹faithful˺ servants.” And sufficient is your Lord as a Guardian
17|66|It is your Lord Who steers the ships for you through the sea, so that you may seek His bounty. Surely He is ever Merciful to you
17|67|When you are touched with hardship at sea, you ˹totally˺ forget all ˹the gods˺ you ˹normally˺ invoke, except Him. But when He delivers you ˹safely˺ to shore, you turn away. Humankind is ever ungrateful
17|68|Do you feel secure that He will not cause the land to swallow you up, or unleash upon you a storm of stones? Then you will find none to protect you
17|69|Or do you feel secure that He will not send you back to sea once again, and send upon you a violent storm, drowning you for your denial? Then you will find none to avenge you against Us
17|70|Indeed, We have dignified the children of Adam, carried them on land and sea, granted them good and lawful provisions, and privileged them far above many of Our creatures
17|71|˹Beware of˺ the Day We will summon every people with their leader. So whoever will be given their record in their right hand will read it ˹happily˺ and will not be wronged ˹even by the width of˺ the thread of a date stone
17|72|But whoever is blind ˹to the truth˺ in this ˹world˺ will be blind in the Hereafter, and ˹even˺ far more astray from the ˹Right˺ Way
17|73|They definitely ˹thought they˺ were about to lure you away from what We have revealed to you ˹O Prophet˺, hoping that you would attribute something else to Us falsely—and then they would have certainly taken you as a close friend
17|74|Had We not made you steadfast, you probably would have inclined to them a little
17|75|and then We truly would have made you taste double ˹punishment˺ both in this life and after death, and you would have found no helper against Us
17|76|They were about to intimidate you to drive you out of the land ˹of Mecca˺, but then they would not have survived after you ˹had left˺ except for a little while
17|77|˹This has been˺ Our way with the messengers We sent before you. And you will never find any change in Our way
17|78|Observe the prayer from the decline of the sun until the darkness of the night and the dawn prayer, for certainly the dawn prayer is witnessed ˹by angels˺
17|79|And rise at ˹the last˺ part of the night, offering additional prayers, so your Lord may raise you to a station of praise
17|80|And say, “My Lord! Grant me an honourable entrance and an honourable exit and give me a supporting authority from Yourself.”
17|81|And declare, “The truth has come and falsehood has vanished. Indeed, falsehood is bound to vanish.”
17|82|We send down the Quran as a healing and mercy for the believers, but it only increases the wrongdoers in loss
17|83|When We grant people Our favours, they turn away, acting arrogantly. But when touched with evil, they lose all hope
17|84|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Everyone acts in their own way. But your Lord knows best whose way is rightly guided.”
17|85|They ask you ˹O Prophet˺ about the spirit. Say, “Its nature is known only to my Lord, and you ˹O humanity˺ have been given but little knowledge.”
17|86|If We willed, We could have certainly taken away what We have revealed to you ˹O Prophet˺—then you would find none to guarantee its return from Us—
17|87|had it not been for the mercy of your Lord. Indeed, His favour upon you is immense
17|88|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “If ˹all˺ humans and jinn were to come together to produce the equivalent of this Quran, they could not produce its equal, no matter how they supported each other.”
17|89|And We have truly set forth every ˹kind of˺ lesson for humanity in this Quran, yet most people persist in disbelief
17|90|They challenge ˹the Prophet˺, “We will never believe in you until you cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for us
17|91|or until you have a garden of palm trees and vineyards, and cause rivers to flow abundantly in it
17|92|or cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces, as you have claimed, or bring God and the angels before us, face to face
17|93|or until you have a house of gold, or you ascend into heaven—and even then we will not believe in your ascension until you bring down to us a book that we can read.” Say, “Glory be to my Lord! Am I not only a human messenger?”
17|94|And nothing has prevented people from believing when guidance comes to them except their protest: “Has God sent a human as a messenger?”
17|95|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Had there been angels walking the earth, well settled, We would have surely sent down for them an angel from heaven as a messenger.”
17|96|Say, “Sufficient is God as a Witness between me and you. He is certainly All-Knowing, All-Seeing of His servants.”
17|97|Whoever God guides is truly guided. And whoever He leaves to stray, you will find no guardians for them besides Him. And We will drag them on their faces on the Day of Judgment—deaf, dumb, and blind. Hell will be their home. Whenever it dies down, We will flare it up for them
17|98|That is their reward for rejecting Our signs and asking ˹mockingly˺, “When we are reduced to bones and ashes, will we really be raised as a new creation?”
17|99|Have they not realized that God, Who created the heavens and the earth, can ˹easily˺ re-create them? He has ˹already˺ set for them a time, about which there is no doubt. But the wrongdoers persist in denial
17|100|Say ˹to them, O Prophet˺, “Even if you were to possess the ˹infinite˺ treasuries of my Lord’s mercy, then you would certainly withhold ˹them˺, fearing they would run out—for humankind is ever stingy!”
17|101|We surely gave Moses nine clear signs. ˹You, O Prophet, can˺ ask the Children of Israel. When Moses came to them, Pharaoh said to him, “I really think that you, O Moses, are bewitched.”
17|102|Moses replied, “You know well that none has sent these ˹signs˺ down except the Lord of the heavens and the earth as insights. And I really think that you, O Pharaoh, are doomed.”
17|103|So Pharaoh wanted to scare the Israelites out of the land ˹of Egypt˺, but We drowned him and all of those with him
17|104|And We said to the Children of Israel after Pharaoh, “Reside in the land, but when the promise of the Hereafter comes to pass, We will bring you all together.”
17|105|We have sent down the Quran in truth, and with the truth it has come down. We have sent you ˹O Prophet˺ only as a deliverer of good news and a warner
17|106|˹It is˺ a Quran We have revealed in stages so that you may recite it to people at a deliberate pace. And We have sent it down in successive revelations
17|107|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Believe in this ˹Quran˺, or do not. Indeed, when it is recited to those who were gifted with knowledge before it ˹was revealed˺, they fall upon their faces in prostration
17|108|and say, ‘Glory be to our Lord! Surely the promise of our Lord has been fulfilled.’
17|109|And they fall down upon their faces weeping, and it increases them in humility.”
17|110|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Call upon God or call upon the Most Compassionate—whichever you call, He has the Most Beautiful Names.” Do not recite your prayers too loudly or silently, but seek a way between
17|111|And say, “All praise is for God, Who has never had ˹any˺ offspring; nor does He have a partner in ˹governing˺ the kingdom; nor is He pathetic, needing a protector. And revere Him immensely.”
18|1|All praise is for God Who has revealed the Book to His servant, allowing no crookedness in it
18|2|˹making it˺ perfectly upright, to warn ˹the disbelievers˺ of a severe torment from Him; to give good news to the believers—who do good—that they will have a fine reward
18|3|in which they will remain forever
18|4|and to warn those who claim, “God has offspring.”
18|5|They have no knowledge of this, nor did their forefathers. What a terrible claim that comes out of their mouths! They say nothing but lies
18|6|Now, perhaps you ˹O Prophet˺ will grieve yourself to death over their denial, if they ˹continue to˺ disbelieve in this message
18|7|We have indeed made whatever is on earth as an adornment for it, in order to test which of them is best in deeds
18|8|And We will certainly reduce whatever is on it to barren ground
18|9|Have you ˹O Prophet˺ thought that the people of the cave and the plaque were ˹the only˺ wonders of Our signs
18|10|˹Remember˺ when those youths took refuge in the cave, and said, “Our Lord! Grant us mercy from Yourself and guide us rightly through our ordeal.”
18|11|So We caused them to fall into a dead sleep in the cave for many years
18|12|then We raised them so We may show which of the two groups would make a better estimation of the length of their stay
18|13|We relate to you ˹O Prophet˺ their story in truth. They were youths who truly believed in their Lord, and We increased them in guidance
18|14|And We strengthened their hearts when they stood up and declared, “Our Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth. We will never call upon any god besides Him, or we would truly be uttering an outrageous lie.”
18|15|˹Then they said to one another,˺ “These people of ours have taken gods besides Him. Why do they not produce a clear proof of them? Who then does more wrong than those who fabricate lies against God
18|16|Since you have distanced yourselves from them and what they worship besides God, take refuge in the cave. Your Lord will extend His mercy to you and accommodate you in your ordeal.”
18|17|And you would have seen the sun, as it rose, inclining away from their cave to the right, and as it set, declining away from them to the left, while they lay in its open space. That is one of the signs of God. Whoever God guides is truly guided. But whoever He leaves to stray, you will never find for them a guiding mentor
18|18|And you would have thought they were awake, though they were asleep. We turned them over, to the right and left, while their dog stretched his forelegs at the entrance. Had you looked at them, you would have certainly fled away from them, filled with horror
18|19|And so We awakened them so that they might question one another. One of them exclaimed, “How long have you remained ˹asleep˺?” Some replied, “Perhaps a day, or part of a day.” They said ˹to one another˺, “Your Lord knows best how long you have remained. So send one of you with these silver coins of yours to the city, and let him find which food is the purest, and then bring you provisions from it. Let him be ˹exceptionally˺ cautious, and do not let him give you away
18|20|For, indeed, if they find out about you, they will stone you ˹to death˺, or force you back into their faith, and then you will never succeed.”
18|21|That is how We caused them to be discovered so that their people might know that God’s promise ˹of resurrection˺ is true and that there is no doubt about the Hour. When the people disputed with each other about the case of the youth ˹after their death˺, some proposed, “Build a structure around them. Their Lord knows best about them.” Those who prevailed in the matter said, “We will surely build a place of worship over them.”
18|22|Some will say, “They were three, their dog was the fourth,” while others will say, “They were five, their dog was the sixth,” ˹only˺ guessing blindly. And others will say, “They were seven and their dog was the eighth.” Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “My Lord knows best their ˹exact˺ number. Only a few people know as well.” So do not argue about them except with sure knowledge, nor consult any of those ˹who debate˺ about them
18|23|And never say of anything, “I will definitely do this tomorrow,”
18|24|without adding, “if God so wills!” But if you forget, then remember your Lord, and say, “I trust my Lord will guide me to what is more right than this.”
18|25|They had remained in their cave for three hundred years, adding nine
18|26|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “God knows best how long they stayed. With Him ˹alone˺ is ˹the knowledge of˺ the unseen of the heavens and the earth. How perfectly He hears and sees! They have no guardian besides Him, and He shares His command with none.”
18|27|Recite what has been revealed to you from the Book of your Lord. None can change His Words, nor can you find any refuge besides Him
18|28|And patiently stick with those who call upon their Lord morning and evening, seeking His pleasure. Do not let your eyes look beyond them, desiring the luxuries of this worldly life. And do not obey those whose hearts We have made heedless of Our remembrance, who follow ˹only˺ their desires and whose state is ˹total˺ loss
18|29|And say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “˹This is˺ the truth from your Lord. Whoever wills let them believe, and whoever wills let them disbelieve.” Surely We have prepared for the wrongdoers a Fire whose walls will ˹completely˺ surround them. When they cry for aid, they will be aided with water like molten metal, which will burn ˹their˺ faces. What a horrible drink! And what a terrible place to rest
18|30|As for those who believe and do good, We certainly never deny the reward of those who are best in deeds
18|31|It is they who will have the Gardens of Eternity, with rivers flowing under their feet. There they will be adorned with bracelets of gold, and wear green garments of fine silk and rich brocade, reclining there on ˹canopied˺ couches. What a marvellous reward! And what a fabulous place to rest
18|32|Give them ˹O Prophet˺ an example of two men. To ˹the disbelieving˺ one We gave two gardens of grapevines, which We surrounded with palm trees and placed ˹various˺ crops in between
18|33|Each garden yielded ˹all˺ its produce, never falling short. And We caused a river to flow between them
18|34|And he had other resources ˹as well˺. So he boasted to a ˹poor˺ companion of his, while conversing with him, “I am greater than you in wealth and superior in manpower.”
18|35|And he entered his property, while wronging his soul, saying, “I do not think this will ever perish
18|36|nor do I think the Hour will ˹ever˺ come. And if in fact I am returned to my Lord, I will definitely get a far better outcome than ˹all˺ this.”
18|37|His ˹believing˺ companion replied, while conversing with him, “Do you disbelieve in the One Who created you from dust, then ˹developed you˺ from a sperm-drop, then formed you into a man
18|38|But as for me: He is God, my Lord, and I will never associate anyone with my Lord ˹in worship˺
18|39|If only you had said, upon entering your property, ‘This is what God has willed! There is no power except with God!’ Even though you see me inferior to you in wealth and offspring
18|40|perhaps my Lord will grant me ˹something˺ better than your garden, and send down upon your garden a thunderbolt from the sky, turning it into a barren waste
18|41|Or its water may sink ˹into the earth˺, and then you will never be able to seek it out.”
18|42|And so all his produce was ˹totally˺ ruined, so he started to wring his hands for all he had spent on it, while it had collapsed on its trellises. He cried, “Alas! I wish I had never associated anyone with my Lord ˹in worship˺!”
18|43|And he had no manpower to help him against God, nor could he ˹even˺ help himself
18|44|At this time, support comes ˹only˺ from God—the True ˹Lord˺. He is best in reward and best in outcome
18|45|And give them a parable of this worldly life. ˹It is˺ like the plants of the earth, thriving when sustained by the rain We send down from the sky. Then they ˹soon˺ turn into chaff scattered by the wind. And God is fully capable of ˹doing˺ all things
18|46|Wealth and children are the adornment of this worldly life, but the everlasting good deeds are far better with your Lord in reward and in hope
18|47|˹Beware of˺ the Day We will blow the mountains away, and you will see the earth laid bare. And We will gather all ˹humankind˺, leaving none behind
18|48|They will be presented before your Lord in rows, ˹and the deniers will be told,˺ “You have surely returned to Us ˹all alone˺ as We created you the first time, although you ˹always˺ claimed that We would never appoint a time for your return.”
18|49|And the record ˹of deeds˺ will be laid ˹open˺, and you will see the wicked in fear of what is ˹written˺ in it. They will cry, “Woe to us! What kind of record is this that does not leave any sin, small or large, unlisted?” They will find whatever they did present ˹before them˺. And your Lord will never wrong anyone
18|50|And ˹remember˺ when We said to the angels, “Prostrate before Adam,” so they all did—but not Iblîs, who was one of the jinn, but he rebelled against the command of his Lord. Would you then take him and his descendants as patrons instead of Me, although they are your enemy? What an evil alternative for the wrongdoers ˹to choose˺
18|51|I never called them to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth or ˹even˺ their own creation, nor would I take the misleaders as helpers
18|52|And ˹beware of˺ the Day He will say, “Call upon those you claimed were My associate-gods.” So they will call them, but will receive no response. And We will make them ˹all˺ share in the same doom
18|53|The wicked will see the Fire and realize that they are bound to fall into it, and will find no way to avoid it
18|54|We have surely set forth in this Quran every ˹kind of˺ lesson for people, but humankind is the most argumentative of all beings
18|55|And nothing prevents people from believing when guidance comes to them and from seeking their Lord’s forgiveness except ˹their demand˺ to meet the same fate of earlier deniers or that the torment would confront them face to face
18|56|We do not send the messengers except as deliverers of good news and warners. But the disbelievers argue in falsehood, ˹hoping˺ to discredit the truth with it, and make a mockery of My revelations and warnings
18|57|And who does more wrong than those who, when reminded of their Lord’s revelations, turn away from them and forget what their own hands have done? We have certainly cast veils over their hearts—leaving them unable to comprehend this ˹Quran˺—and deafness in their ears. And if you ˹O Prophet˺ invite them to ˹true˺ guidance, they will never be ˹rightly˺ guided
18|58|Your Lord is the All-Forgiving, Full of Mercy. If He were to seize them ˹immediately˺ for what they commit, He would have certainly hastened their punishment. But they have an appointed time, from which they will find no refuge
18|59|Those ˹are the˺ societies We destroyed when they persisted in wrong, and We had set a time for their destruction
18|60|And ˹remember˺ when Moses said to his young assistant, “I will never give up until I reach the junction of the two seas, even if I travel for ages.”
18|61|But when they ˹finally˺ reached the point where the seas met, they forgot their ˹salted˺ fish, and it made its way into the sea, slipping away ˹wondrously˺
18|62|When they had passed further, he said to his assistant, “Bring us our meal! We have certainly been exhausted by today’s journey.”
18|63|He replied, “Do you remember when we rested by the rock? ˹That is when˺ I forgot the fish. None made me forget to mention this except Satan. And the fish made its way into the sea miraculously.”
18|64|Moses responded, “That is ˹exactly˺ what we were looking for.” So they returned, retracing their footsteps
18|65|There they found a servant of Ours, to whom We had granted mercy from Us and enlightened with knowledge of Our Own
18|66|Moses said to him, “May I follow you, provided that you teach me some of the right guidance you have been taught?”
18|67|He said, “You certainly cannot be patient ˹enough˺ with me
18|68|And how can you be patient with what is beyond your ˹realm of˺ knowledge?”
18|69|Moses assured ˹him˺, “You will find me patient, God willing, and I will not disobey any of your orders.”
18|70|He responded, “Then if you follow me, do not question me about anything until I ˹myself˺ clarify it for you.”
18|71|So they set out, but after they had boarded a ship, the man made a hole in it. Moses protested, “Have you done this to drown its people? You have certainly done a terrible thing!”
18|72|He replied, “Did I not say that you cannot have patience with me?”
18|73|Moses pleaded, “Excuse me for forgetting, and do not be hard on me.”
18|74|So they proceeded until they came across a boy, and the man killed him. Moses protested, “Have you killed an innocent soul, who killed no one? You have certainly done a horrible thing.”
18|75|He answered, “Did I not tell you that you cannot have patience with me?”
18|76|Moses replied, “If I ever question you about anything after this, then do not keep me in your company, for by then I would have given you enough of an excuse.”
18|77|So they moved on until they came to the people of a town. They asked them for food, but the people refused to give them hospitality. There they found a wall ready to collapse, so the man set it right. Moses protested, “If you wanted, you could have demanded a fee for this.”
18|78|He replied, “This is the parting of our ways. I will explain to you what you could not bear patiently
18|79|“As for the ship, it belonged to some poor people, working at sea. So I intended to damage it, for there was a ˹tyrant˺ king ahead of them who seizes every ˹good˺ ship by force
18|80|“And as for the boy, his parents were ˹true˺ believers, and we feared that he would pressure them into defiance and disbelief
18|81|So we hoped that their Lord would give them another, more virtuous and caring in his place
18|82|“And as for the wall, it belonged to two orphan boys in the city, and under the wall was a treasure that belonged to them, and their father had been a righteous man. So your Lord willed that these children should come of age and retrieve their treasure, as a mercy from your Lord. I did not do it ˹all˺ on my own. This is the explanation of what you could not bear patiently.”
18|83|They ask you ˹O Prophet˺ about Ⱬul-Qarnain. Say, “I will relate to you something of his narrative.”
18|84|Surely We established him in the land, and gave him the means to all things
18|85|So he travelled a course
18|86|until he reached the setting ˹point˺ of the sun, which appeared to him to be setting in a spring of murky water, where he found some people. We said, “O Ⱬul-Qarnain! Either punish them or treat them kindly.”
18|87|He responded, “Whoever does wrong will be punished by us, then will be returned to their Lord, Who will punish them with a horrible torment
18|88|As for those who believe and do good, they will have the finest reward, and we will assign them easy commands.”
18|89|Then he travelled a ˹different˺ course
18|90|until he reached the rising ˹point˺ of the sun. He found it rising on a people for whom We had provided no shelter from it
18|91|So it was. And We truly had full knowledge of him
18|92|Then he travelled a ˹third˺ course
18|93|until he reached ˹a pass˺ between two mountains. He found in front of them a people who could hardly understand ˹his˺ language
18|94|They pleaded, “O Ⱬul-Qarnain! Surely Gog and Magog are spreading corruption throughout the land. Should we pay you tribute, provided that you build a wall between us and them?”
18|95|He responded, “What my Lord has provided for me is far better. But assist me with resources, and I will build a barrier between you and them
18|96|Bring me blocks of iron!” Then, when he had filled up ˹the gap˺ between the two mountains, he ordered, “Blow!” When the iron became red hot, he said, “Bring me molten copper to pour over it.”
18|97|And so the enemies could neither scale nor tunnel through it
18|98|He declared, “This is a mercy from my Lord. But when the promise of my Lord comes to pass, He will level it to the ground. And my Lord’s promise is ever true.”
18|99|On that Day, We will let them surge ˹like waves˺ over one another. Later, the Trumpet will be blown, and We will gather all ˹people˺ together
18|100|On that Day We will display Hell clearly for the disbelievers
18|101|those who turned a blind eye to My Reminder and could not stand listening ˹to it˺
18|102|Do the disbelievers think they can ˹simply˺ take My servants as lords instead of Me? We have surely prepared Hell as an accommodation for the disbelievers
18|103|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Shall we inform you of who will lose the most deeds
18|104|˹They are˺ those whose efforts are in vain in this worldly life, while they think they are doing good!”
18|105|It is they who reject the signs of their Lord and their meeting with Him, rendering their deeds void, so We will not give their deeds any weight on Judgment Day
18|106|That is their reward: Hell, for their disbelief and mockery of My signs and messengers
18|107|Indeed, those who believe and do good will have the Gardens of Paradise as an accommodation
18|108|where they will be forever, never desiring anywhere else
18|109|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “If the ocean were ink for ˹writing˺ the Words of my Lord, it would certainly run out before the Words of my Lord were finished, even if We refilled it with its equal.”
18|110|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “I am only a man like you, ˹but˺ it has been revealed to me that your God is only One God. So whoever hopes for the meeting with their Lord, let them do good deeds and associate none in the worship of their Lord.”
19|1|Kãf-Ha-Ya-’Aĩn- Ṣãd
19|2|˹This is˺ a reminder of your Lord’s mercy to His servant Zachariah
19|3|when he cried out to his Lord privately
19|4|saying, “My Lord! Surely my bones have become brittle, and grey hair has spread across my head, but I have never been disappointed in my prayer to You, my Lord
19|5|And I am concerned about ˹the faith of˺ my relatives after me, since my wife is barren. So grant me, by Your grace, an heir
19|6|who will inherit ˹prophethood˺ from me and the family of Jacob, and make him, O Lord, pleasing ˹to You˺!”
19|7|˹The angels announced,˺ “O Zachariah! Indeed, We give you the good news of ˹the birth of˺ a son, whose name will be John—a name We have not given to anyone before.”
19|8|He wondered, “My Lord! How can I have a son when my wife is barren, and I have become extremely old?”
19|9|An angel replied, “So will it be! Your Lord says, ‘It is easy for Me, just as I created you before, when you were nothing!’”
19|10|Zachariah said, “My Lord! Grant me a sign.” He responded, “Your sign is that you will not ˹be able to˺ speak to people for three nights, despite being healthy.”
19|11|So he came out to his people from the sanctuary, signalling to them to glorify ˹God˺ morning and evening
19|12|˹It was later said,˺ “O John! Hold firmly to the Scriptures.” And We granted him wisdom while ˹he was still˺ a child
19|13|as well as purity and compassion from Us. And he was God-fearing
19|14|and kind to his parents. He was neither arrogant nor disobedient
19|15|Peace be upon him the day he was born, and the day of his death, and the day he will be raised back to life
19|16|And mention in the Book ˹O Prophet, the story of˺ Mary when she withdrew from her family to a place in the east
19|17|screening herself off from them. Then We sent to her Our angel, ˹Gabriel,˺ appearing before her as a man, perfectly formed
19|18|She appealed, “I truly seek refuge in the Most Compassionate from you! ˹So leave me alone˺ if you are God-fearing.”
19|19|He responded, “I am only a messenger from your Lord, ˹sent˺ to bless you with a pure son.”
19|20|She wondered, “How can I have a son when no man has ever touched me, nor am I unchaste?”
19|21|He replied, “So will it be! Your Lord says, ‘It is easy for Me. And so will We make him a sign for humanity and a mercy from Us.’ It is a matter ˹already˺ decreed.”
19|22|So she conceived him and withdrew with him to a remote place
19|23|Then the pains of labour drove her to the trunk of a palm tree. She cried, “Alas! I wish I had died before this, and was a thing long forgotten!”
19|24|So a voice reassured her from below her, “Do not grieve! Your Lord has provided a stream at your feet
19|25|And shake the trunk of this palm tree towards you, it will drop fresh, ripe dates upon you
19|26|So eat and drink, and put your heart at ease. But if you see any of the people, say, ‘I have vowed silence to the Most Compassionate, so I am not talking to anyone today.’”
19|27|Then she returned to her people, carrying him. They said ˹in shock˺, “O Mary! You have certainly done a horrible thing
19|28|O sister of Aaron! Your father was not an indecent man, nor was your mother unchaste.”
19|29|So she pointed to the baby. They exclaimed, “How can we talk to someone who is an infant in the cradle?”
19|30|˹Jesus˺ declared, “I am truly a servant of God. He has destined me to be given the Scripture and to be a prophet
19|31|He has made me a blessing wherever I go, and bid me to establish prayer and give alms-tax as long as I live
19|32|and to be kind to my mother. He has not made me arrogant or defiant
19|33|Peace be upon me the day I was born, the day I die, and the day I will be raised back to life!”
19|34|That is Jesus, son of Mary. ˹And this is˺ a word of truth, about which they dispute
19|35|It is not for God to take a son! Glory be to Him. When He decrees a matter, He simply tells it, “Be!” And it is
19|36|˹Jesus also declared,˺ “Surely God is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him ˹alone˺. This is the Straight Path.”
19|37|Yet their ˹various˺ groups have differed among themselves ˹about him˺, so woe to the disbelievers when they face a tremendous Day
19|38|How clearly will they hear and see on the Day they will come to Us! But today the wrongdoers are clearly astray
19|39|And warn them ˹O Prophet˺ of the Day of Regret, when all matters will be settled, while they are ˹engrossed˺ in heedlessness and disbelief
19|40|Indeed, it is We Who will succeed the earth and whoever is on it. And to Us they will ˹all˺ be returned
19|41|And mention in the Book ˹O Prophet, the story of˺ Abraham. He was surely a man of truth and a prophet
19|42|˹Remember˺ when he said to his father, “O dear father! Why do you worship what can neither hear nor see, nor benefit you at all
19|43|O dear father! I have certainly received some knowledge which you have not received, so follow me and I will guide you to the Straight Path
19|44|O dear father! Do not worship Satan. Surely Satan is ever rebellious against the Most Compassionate
19|45|O dear father! I truly fear that you will be touched by a torment from the Most Compassionate, and become Satan’s companion ˹in Hell˺.”
19|46|He threatened, “How dare you reject my idols, O Abraham! If you do not desist, I will certainly stone you ˹to death˺. So be gone from me for a long time!”
19|47|Abraham responded, “Peace be upon you! I will pray to my Lord for your forgiveness. He has truly been Most Gracious to me
19|48|As I distance myself from ˹all of˺ you and from whatever you invoke besides God, I will ˹continue to˺ call upon my Lord ˹alone˺, trusting that I will never be disappointed in invoking my Lord.”
19|49|So after he had left them and what they worshipped besides God, We granted him Isaac and Jacob, and made each of them a prophet
19|50|We showered them with Our mercy, and blessed them with honourable mention
19|51|And mention in the Book ˹O Prophet, the story of˺ Moses. He was truly a chosen man, and was a messenger and a prophet
19|52|We called him from the right side of Mount Ṭûr, and drew him near, speaking ˹with him˺ directly
19|53|And We appointed for him—out of Our grace—his brother, Aaron, as a prophet
19|54|And mention in the Book ˹O Prophet, the story of˺ Ishmael. He was truly a man of his word, and was a messenger and a prophet
19|55|He used to urge his people to pray and give alms-tax. And his Lord was well pleased with him
19|56|And mention in the Book ˹O Prophet, the story of˺ Enoch. He was surely a man of truth and a prophet
19|57|And We elevated him to an honourable status
19|58|Those were ˹some of˺ the prophets who God has blessed from among the descendants of Adam, and of those We carried with Noah ˹in the Ark˺, and of the descendants of Abraham and Israel, and of those We ˹rightly˺ guided and chose. Whenever the revelations of the Most Compassionate were recited to them, they fell down, prostrating and weeping
19|59|But they were succeeded by generations who neglected prayer and followed their lusts and so will soon face the evil consequences
19|60|As for those who repent, believe, and do good, it is they who will be admitted into Paradise, never being denied any reward
19|61|˹They will be in˺ the Gardens of Eternity, promised in trust by the Most Compassionate to His servants. Surely His promise will be fulfilled
19|62|There they will never hear any idle talk—only ˹greetings of˺ peace. And there they will have their provisions morning and evening
19|63|That is Paradise, which We will grant to whoever is devout among Our servants
19|64|“We only descend by the command of your Lord. To Him belongs whatever is before us, and whatever is behind us, and everything in between. And your Lord is never forgetful
19|65|˹He is the˺ Lord of the heavens, and the earth, and everything in between. So worship Him ˹alone˺, and be steadfast in His worship. Do you know of anyone equal to Him ˹in His attributes˺?”
19|66|Yet ˹some˺ people ask ˹mockingly˺, “After I die, will I really be raised to life again?”
19|67|Do ˹such˺ people not remember that We created them before, when they were nothing
19|68|By your Lord ˹O Prophet˺! We will surely gather them along with the devils, and then set them around Hell on their knees
19|69|Then We will certainly begin by dragging out of every group the ones most defiant to the Most Compassionate
19|70|And We truly know best who is most deserving of burning in it
19|71|There is none of you who will not pass over it. ˹This is˺ a decree your Lord must fulfil
19|72|Then We will deliver those who were devout, leaving the wrongdoers there on their knees
19|73|When Our clear revelations are recited to them, the disbelievers ask the believers ˹mockingly˺, “Which of the two of us is better in status and superior in assembly?”
19|74|˹Imagine, O Prophet˺ how many peoples We have destroyed before them, who were far better in luxury and splendour
19|75|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Whoever is ˹entrenched˺ in misguidance, the Most Compassionate will allow them plenty of time, until—behold!—they face what they are threatened with: either the torment or the Hour. Only then will they realize who is worse in position and inferior in manpower.”
19|76|And God increases in guidance those who are ˹rightly˺ guided. And the everlasting good deeds are far better with your Lord in reward and in outcome
19|77|Have you seen ˹O Prophet˺ the one who rejects Our revelations yet boasts, “I will definitely be granted ˹plenty of˺ wealth and children ˹if there is an afterlife˺.”
19|78|Has he looked into the unseen or taken a pledge from the Most Compassionate
19|79|Not at all! We certainly record whatever he claims and will increase his punishment extensively
19|80|And We will inherit what he boasts of, and he will come before Us all by himself
19|81|They have taken other gods, instead of God, seeking strength ˹and protection˺ through them
19|82|But no! Those ˹gods˺ will deny their worship and turn against them
19|83|Do you ˹O Prophet˺ not see that We have sent the devils against the disbelievers, constantly inciting them
19|84|So do not be in haste against them, for indeed We are ˹closely˺ counting down their days
19|85|˹Watch for˺ the Day We will gather the righteous before the Most Compassionate as an honoured delegation
19|86|and drive the wicked to Hell like a thirsty herd
19|87|None will have the right to intercede, except those who have taken a covenant from the Most Compassionate
19|88|They say, “The Most Compassionate has offspring.”
19|89|You have certainly made an outrageous claim
19|90|by which the heavens are about to burst, the earth to split apart, and the mountains to crumble to pieces
19|91|in protest of attributing children to the Most Compassionate
19|92|It does not befit ˹the majesty of˺ the Most Compassionate to have children
19|93|There is none in the heavens or the earth who will not return to the Most Compassionate in full submission
19|94|Indeed, He fully knows them and has counted them precisely
19|95|And each of them will return to Him on the Day of Judgment all alone
19|96|As for those who believe and do good, the Most Compassionate will ˹certainly˺ bless them with ˹genuine˺ love
19|97|Indeed, We have made this ˹Quran˺ easy in your own language ˹O Prophet˺ so with it you may give good news to the righteous and warn those who are contentious
19|98|˹Imagine˺ how many peoples We have destroyed before them! Do you ˹still˺ see any of them, or ˹even˺ hear from them the slightest sound
20|1|Ṭâ-Hâ
20|2|We have not revealed the Quran to you ˹O Prophet˺ to cause you distress
20|3|but as a reminder to those in awe ˹of God˺
20|4|˹It is˺ a revelation from the One Who created the earth and the high heavens—
20|5|the Most Compassionate, ˹Who is˺ established on the Throne
20|6|To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth and whatever is in between and whatever is underground
20|7|Whether you speak openly ˹or not˺, He certainly knows what is secret and what is even more hidden
20|8|God—there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him. He has the Most Beautiful Names
20|9|Has the story of Moses reached you ˹O Prophet˺
20|10|When he saw a fire, he said to his family, “Wait here, ˹for˺ I have spotted a fire. Perhaps I can bring you a torch from it, or find some guidance at the fire.”
20|11|But when he approached it, he was called, “O Moses
20|12|It is truly I. I am your Lord! So take off your sandals, for you are in the sacred valley of Ṭuwa
20|13|I have chosen you, so listen to what is revealed
20|14|‘It is truly I. I am God! There is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Me. So worship Me ˹alone˺, and establish prayer for My remembrance
20|15|The Hour is sure to come. My Will is to keep it hidden, so that every soul may be rewarded according to their efforts
20|16|So do not let those who disbelieve in it and follow their desires distract you from it, or you will be doomed.’”
20|17|˹God added,˺ “And what is that in your right hand, O Moses?”
20|18|He replied, “It is my staff! I lean on it, and with it I beat down ˹branches˺ for my sheep, and have other uses for it.”
20|19|God said, “Throw it down, O Moses!”
20|20|So he did, then—behold!—it became a serpent, slithering
20|21|God said, “Take it, and have no fear. We will return it to its former state
20|22|And put your hand under your armpit, it will come out ˹shining˺ white, unblemished, as another sign
20|23|so that We may show you some of Our greatest signs
20|24|Go to Pharaoh, for he has truly transgressed ˹all bounds˺.”
20|25|Moses prayed, “My Lord! Uplift my heart for me
20|26|and make my task easy
20|27|and remove the impediment from my tongue
20|28|so people may understand my speech
20|29|and grant me a helper from my family
20|30|Aaron, my brother
20|31|Strengthen me through him
20|32|and let him share my task
20|33|so that we may glorify You much
20|34|and remember You much
20|35|for truly You have ˹always˺ been overseeing us.”
20|36|God responded, “All that you requested has been granted, O Moses
20|37|And surely We had shown You favour before
20|38|when We inspired your mother with this
20|39|‘Put him into a chest, then put it into the river. The river will wash it ashore, and he will be taken by ˹Pharaoh,˺ an enemy of Mine and his.’ And I blessed you with lovability from Me ˹O Moses˺ so that you would be brought up under My ˹watchful˺ Eye
20|40|˹Remember˺ when your sister came along and proposed, ‘Shall I direct you to someone who will nurse him?’ So We reunited you with your mother so that her heart would be put at ease, and she would not grieve. ˹Later˺ you killed a man ˹by mistake˺, but We saved you from sorrow, as well as other tests We put you through. Then you stayed for a number of years among the people of Midian. Then you came here as pre-destined, O Moses
20|41|And I have selected you for My service
20|42|Go forth, you and your brother, with My signs and never falter in remembering Me
20|43|Go, both of you, to Pharaoh, for he has truly transgressed ˹all bounds˺
20|44|Speak to him gently, so perhaps he may be mindful ˹of Me˺ or fearful ˹of My punishment˺.”
20|45|They both pleaded, “Our Lord! We fear that he may be quick to harm us or act tyrannically.”
20|46|God reassured ˹them˺, “Have no fear! I am with you, hearing and seeing
20|47|So go to him and say, ‘Indeed we are both messengers from your Lord, so let the Children of Israel go with us, and do not oppress them. We have come to you with a sign from your Lord. And salvation will be for whoever follows the ˹right˺ guidance
20|48|It has indeed been revealed to us that the punishment will be upon whoever denies ˹the truth˺ and turns away.’”
20|49|Pharaoh asked, “Who then is the Lord of you two, O Moses?”
20|50|He answered, “Our Lord is the One Who has given everything its ˹distinctive˺ form, then guided ˹it˺.”
20|51|Pharaoh asked, “And what about previous peoples?”
20|52|He replied, “That knowledge is with my Lord in a Record. My Lord neither falters nor forgets ˹anything˺.”
20|53|˹He is the One˺ Who has laid out the earth for ˹all of˺ you, and set in it pathways for you, and sends down rain from the sky, causing various types of plants to grow
20|54|˹so˺ eat and graze your cattle. Surely in this are signs for people of sound judgment
20|55|From the earth We created you, and into it We will return you, and from it We will bring you back again
20|56|And We certainly showed Pharaoh all of Our signs, but he denied them and refused ˹to believe˺
20|57|He said, “Have you come to drive us out of our land with your magic, O Moses
20|58|We can surely meet you with similar magic. So set for us an appointment that neither of us will fail to keep, in a central place.”
20|59|Moses said, “Your appointment is on the Day of the Festival, and let the people be gathered mid-morning.”
20|60|Pharaoh then withdrew, orchestrated his scheme, then returned
20|61|Moses warned the magicians, “Woe to you! Do not fabricate a lie against God, or He will wipe you out with a torment. Whoever fabricates ˹lies˺ is bound to fail.”
20|62|So the magicians disputed the matter among themselves, conversing privately
20|63|They concluded, “These two are only magicians who want to drive you out of your land with their magic, and do away with your most cherished traditions
20|64|So orchestrate your plan, then come forward in ˹perfect˺ ranks. And whoever prevails today will certainly be successful.”
20|65|They said, “O Moses! Either you cast, or let us be the first to cast.”
20|66|Moses responded, “No, you go first.” And suddenly their ropes and staffs appeared to him—by their magic—to be slithering
20|67|So Moses concealed fear within himself
20|68|We reassured ˹him˺, “Do not fear! It is certainly you who will prevail
20|69|Cast what is in your right hand, and it will swallow up what they have made, for what they have made is no more than a magic trick. And magicians can never succeed wherever they go.”
20|70|So the magicians fell down in prostration, declaring, “We believe in the Lord of Aaron and Moses.”
20|71|Pharaoh threatened, “How dare you believe in him before I give you permission? He must be your master who taught you magic. I will certainly cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides, and crucify you on the trunks of palm trees. You will really see whose punishment is more severe and more lasting.”
20|72|They responded, “By the One Who created us! We will never prefer you over the clear proofs that have come to us. So do whatever you want! Your authority only covers the ˹fleeting˺ life of this world
20|73|Indeed, we have believed in our Lord so He may forgive our sins and that magic you have forced us to practice. And God is far superior ˹in reward˺ and more lasting ˹in punishment˺.”
20|74|Whoever comes to their Lord as an evildoer will certainly have Hell, where they can neither live nor die
20|75|But whoever comes to Him as a believer, having done good, they will have the highest ranks
20|76|the Gardens of Eternity, under which rivers flow, where they will stay forever. That is the reward of those who purify themselves
20|77|And We surely inspired Moses, ˹saying,˺ “Leave with My servants ˹at night˺ and strike a dry passage for them across the sea. Have no fear of being overtaken, nor be concerned ˹of drowning˺.”
20|78|Then Pharaoh pursued them with his soldiers—but how overwhelming were the waters that submerged them
20|79|And ˹so˺ Pharaoh led his people astray, and did not guide ˹them rightly˺
20|80|O Children of Israel! We saved you from your enemy, and made an appointment with you on the right side of Mount Ṭûr, and sent down to you manna and quails
20|81|˹saying,˺ “Eat from the good things We have provided for you, but do not transgress in them, or My wrath will befall you. And whoever My wrath befalls is certainly doomed
20|82|But I am truly Most Forgiving to whoever repents, believes, and does good, then persists on ˹true˺ guidance.”
20|83|˹God asked,˺ “Why have you come with such haste ahead of your people, O Moses?”
20|84|He replied, “They are close on my tracks. And I have hastened to You, my Lord, so You will be pleased.”
20|85|God responded, “We have indeed tested your people in your absence, and the Sâmiri has led them astray.”
20|86|So Moses returned to his people, furious and sorrowful. He said, “O my people! Had your Lord not made you a good promise? Has my absence been too long for you? Or have you wished for wrath from your Lord to befall you, so you broke your promise to me?”
20|87|They argued, “We did not break our promise to you of our own free will, but we were made to carry the burden of the people’s ˹golden˺ jewellery, then we threw it ˹into the fire˺, and so did the Sâmiri.”
20|88|Then he moulded for them an idol of a calf that made a lowing sound. They said, “This is your god and the god of Moses, but Moses forgot ˹where it was˺!”
20|89|Did they not see that it did not respond to them, nor could it protect or benefit them
20|90|Aaron had already warned them beforehand, “O my people! You are only being tested by this, for indeed your ˹one true˺ Lord is the Most Compassionate. So follow me and obey my orders.”
20|91|They replied, “We will not cease to worship it until Moses returns to us.”
20|92|Moses scolded ˹his brother˺, “O Aaron! What prevented you, when you saw them going astray
20|93|from following after me? How could you disobey my orders?”
20|94|Aaron pleaded, “O son of my mother! Do not seize me by my beard or ˹the hair of˺ my head. I really feared that you would say, ‘You have caused division among the Children of Israel, and did not observe my word.’”
20|95|Moses then asked, “What did you think you were doing, O Sâmiri?”
20|96|He said, “I saw what they did not see, so I took a handful ˹of dust˺ from the hoof-prints of ˹the horse of˺ the messenger-angel ˹Gabriel˺ then cast it ˹on the moulded calf˺. This is what my lower-self tempted me into.”
20|97|Moses said, “Go away then! And for ˹the rest of your˺ life you will surely be crying, ‘Do not touch ˹me˺!’ Then you will certainly have a fate that you cannot escape. Now look at your god to which you have been devoted: we will burn it up, then scatter it in the sea completely.”
20|98|˹Then Moses addressed his people,˺ “Your only god is God, there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him. He encompasses everything in ˹His˺ knowledge.”
20|99|This is how We relate to you ˹O Prophet˺ some of the stories of the past. And We have certainly granted you a Reminder from Us
20|100|Whoever turns away from it will surely bear the burden ˹of sin˺ on the Day of Judgment
20|101|suffering its consequences forever. What an evil burden they will carry on Judgment Day
20|102|˹Beware of˺ the Day the Trumpet will be blown, and We will gather the wicked on that Day blue-faced ˹from horror and thirst˺
20|103|They will whisper among themselves, “You stayed no more than ten days ˹on the earth˺.”
20|104|We know best what they will say—the most reasonable of them will say, “You stayed no more than a day.”
20|105|And ˹if˺ they ask you ˹O Prophet˺ about the mountains, ˹then˺ say, “My Lord will wipe them out completely
20|106|leaving the earth level and bare
20|107|with neither depressions nor elevations to be seen.”
20|108|On that Day all will follow the caller ˹for assembly˺, ˹and˺ none will dare to deviate. All voices will be hushed before the Most Compassionate. Only whispers will be heard
20|109|On that Day no intercession will be of any benefit, except by those granted permission by the Most Compassionate and whose words are agreeable to Him
20|110|He ˹fully˺ knows what is ahead of them and what is behind them, but they cannot encompass Him in ˹their˺ knowledge
20|111|And all faces will be humbled before the Ever-Living, All-Sustaining. And those burdened with wrongdoing will be in loss
20|112|But whoever does good and is a believer will have no fear of being wronged or denied ˹their reward˺
20|113|And so We have sent it down as an Arabic Quran and varied the warnings in it, so perhaps they will shun evil or it may cause them to be mindful
20|114|Exalted is God, the True King! Do not rush to recite ˹a revelation of˺ the Quran ˹O Prophet˺ before it is ˹properly˺ conveyed to you, and pray, “My Lord! Increase me in knowledge.”
20|115|And indeed, We once made a covenant with Adam, but he forgot, and ˹so˺ We did not find determination in him
20|116|And ˹remember˺ when We said to the angels, “Prostrate before Adam,” so they all did—but not Iblîs, who refused ˹arrogantly˺
20|117|So We cautioned, “O Adam! This is surely an enemy to you and to your wife. So do not let him drive you both out of Paradise, for you ˹O Adam˺ would then suffer ˹hardship˺
20|118|Here it is guaranteed that you will never go hungry or unclothed
20|119|nor will you ˹ever˺ suffer from thirst or ˹the sun’s˺ heat.”
20|120|But Satan whispered to him, saying, “O Adam! Shall I show you the Tree of Immortality and a kingdom that does not fade away?”
20|121|So they both ate from the tree and then their nakedness was exposed to them, prompting them to cover themselves with leaves from Paradise. So Adam disobeyed his Lord, and ˹so˺ lost his way
20|122|Then his Lord chose him ˹for His grace˺, accepted his repentance, and guided him ˹rightly˺
20|123|God said, “Descend, both of you, from here together ˹with Satan˺ as enemies to each other. Then when guidance comes to you from Me, whoever follows My guidance will neither go astray ˹in this life˺ nor suffer ˹in the next˺
20|124|But whoever turns away from My Reminder will certainly have a miserable life, then We will raise them up blind on the Day of Judgment.”
20|125|They will cry, “My Lord! Why have you raised me up blind, although I used to see?”
20|126|God will respond, “It is so, just as Our revelations came to you and you neglected them, so Today you are neglected.”
20|127|This is how We reward whoever transgresses and does not believe in the revelations of their Lord. And the punishment of the Hereafter is far more severe and more lasting
20|128|Is it not yet clear to them how many peoples We destroyed before them, whose ruins they still pass by? Surely in this are signs for people of sound judgment
20|129|Had it not been for a prior decree from your Lord ˹O Prophet˺ and a term already set, their ˹instant˺ doom would have been inevitable
20|130|So be patient ˹O Prophet˺ with what they say. And glorify the praises of your Lord before sunrise and before sunset, and glorify Him in the hours of the night and at both ends of the day, so that you may be pleased ˹with the reward˺
20|131|Do not let your eyes crave what We have allowed some of the disbelievers to enjoy; the ˹fleeting˺ splendour of this worldly life, which We test them with. But your Lord’s provision ˹in the Hereafter˺ is far better and more lasting
20|132|Bid your people to pray, and be diligent in ˹observing˺ it. We do not ask you to provide. It is We Who provide for you. And the ultimate outcome is ˹only˺ for ˹the people of˺ righteousness
20|133|They demand, “If only he could bring us a sign from his Lord!” Have they not ˹already˺ received a confirmation of what is in earlier Scriptures
20|134|Had We destroyed them with a torment before this ˹Prophet came˺, they would have surely argued, “Our Lord! If only You had sent us a messenger, we would have followed Your revelations before being humiliated and put to shame.”
20|135|Say ˹to them, O Prophet˺, “Each ˹of us˺ is waiting, so keep waiting! You will soon know who is on the Straight Path and is ˹rightly˺ guided.”
21|1|˹The time of˺ people’s judgment has drawn near, yet they are heedlessly turning away
21|2|Whatever new reminder comes to them from their Lord, they only listen to it jokingly
21|3|with their hearts ˹totally˺ distracted. The evildoers would converse secretly, ˹saying,˺ “Is this ˹one˺ not human like yourselves? Would you fall for ˹this˺ witchcraft, even though you can ˹clearly˺ see?”
21|4|The Prophet responded, “My Lord ˹fully˺ knows every word spoken in the heavens and the earth. For He is the All-Hearing, All-Knowing.”
21|5|Yet they say, “This ˹Quran˺ is a set of confused dreams! No, he has fabricated it! No, he must be a poet! So let him bring us a ˹tangible˺ sign like those ˹prophets˺ sent before.”
21|6|Not a ˹single˺ society We destroyed before them ever believed ˹after receiving the signs˺. Will these ˹pagans˺ then believe
21|7|We did not send ˹messengers˺ before you ˹O Prophet˺ except mere men inspired by Us. If you ˹polytheists˺ do not know ˹this already˺, then ask those who have knowledge ˹of the Scriptures˺
21|8|We did not give those messengers ˹supernatural˺ bodies that did not need food, nor were they immortal
21|9|Then We fulfilled Our promise to them, saving them along with whoever We willed and destroying the transgressors
21|10|We have surely revealed to you a Book, in which there is glory for you. Will you not then understand
21|11|˹Imagine˺ how many societies of wrongdoers We have destroyed, raising up other people after them
21|12|When the wrongdoers sensed ˹the arrival of˺ Our torment, they started to run away from their cities
21|13|˹They were told,˺ “Do not run away! Return to your luxuries and your homes, so you may be questioned ˹about your fate˺.”
21|14|They cried, “Woe to us! We have surely been wrongdoers.”
21|15|They kept repeating their cry until We mowed them down, ˹leaving them˺ lifeless
21|16|We did not create the heavens and the earth and everything in between for sport
21|17|Had We intended to take ˹some˺ amusement, We could have found it in Our presence, if that had been Our Will
21|18|In fact, We hurl the truth against falsehood, leaving it crushed, and it quickly vanishes. And woe be to you for what you claim
21|19|To Him belong all those in the heavens and the earth. And those nearest to Him are not too proud to worship Him, nor do they tire
21|20|They glorify ˹Him˺ day and night, never wavering
21|21|Or have they taken gods from the earth, who can raise the dead
21|22|Had there been other gods besides God in the heavens or the earth, both ˹realms˺ would have surely been corrupted. So Glorified is God, Lord of the Throne, far above what they claim
21|23|He cannot be questioned about what He does, but they will ˹all˺ be questioned
21|24|Or have they taken other gods besides Him? Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Show ˹me˺ your proof. Here is ˹the Quran,˺ the Reminder for those with me; along with ˹earlier Scriptures,˺ the Reminder for those before me.” But most of them do not know the truth, so they turn away
21|25|We never sent a messenger before you ˹O Prophet˺ without revealing to him: “There is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Me, so worship Me ˹alone˺.”
21|26|And they say, “The Most Compassionate has offspring!” Glory be to Him! In fact, those ˹angels˺ are only ˹His˺ honoured servants
21|27|who do not speak until He has spoken, ˹only˺ acting at His command
21|28|He ˹fully˺ knows what is ahead of them and what is behind them. They do not intercede except for whom He approves, and they tremble in awe of Him
21|29|Whoever of them were to say, “I am a god besides Him,” they would be rewarded with Hell by Us. This is how We reward the wrongdoers
21|30|Do the disbelievers not realize that the heavens and earth were ˹once˺ one mass then We split them apart? And We created from water every living thing. Will they not then believe
21|31|And We have placed firm mountains upon the earth so it does not shake with them, and made in it broad pathways so they may find their way
21|32|And We have made the sky a well-protected canopy, still they turn away from its signs
21|33|And He is the One Who created the day and the night, the sun and the moon—each travelling in an orbit
21|34|We have not granted immortality to any human before you ˹O Prophet˺: so if you die, will they live forever
21|35|Every soul will taste death. And We test you ˹O humanity˺ with good and evil as a trial, then to Us you will ˹all˺ be returned
21|36|When the disbelievers see you ˹O Prophet˺, they only make fun of you, ˹saying,˺ “Is this the one who speaks ˹ill˺ of your gods?” while they disbelieve at the mention of the Most Compassionate
21|37|Humankind is made of haste. I will soon show you My signs, so do not ask Me to hasten them
21|38|They ask ˹the believers˺, “When will this threat come to pass if what you say is true?”
21|39|If only the disbelievers knew that a time will come when they will not be able to keep the Fire off their faces or backs, nor will they be helped
21|40|In fact, the Hour will take them by surprise, leaving them stunned. So they will not be able to avert it, nor will it be delayed from them
21|41|˹Other˺ messengers had already been ridiculed before you ˹O Prophet˺, but those who mocked them were overtaken by what they used to ridicule
21|42|Ask ˹them, O Prophet,˺ “Who can defend you by day or by night against the Most Compassionate?” Still they turn away from the remembrance of their Lord
21|43|Or do they have gods—other than Us—that can protect them? They cannot ˹even˺ protect themselves, nor will they be aided against Us
21|44|In fact, We have allowed enjoyment for these ˹Meccans˺ and their forefathers for such a long time ˹that they took it for granted˺. Do they not see that We gradually reduce ˹their˺ land from its borders? Is it they who will then prevail
21|45|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “I warn you only by revelation.” But the deaf cannot hear the call when they are warned
21|46|If they were touched by even a breath of your Lord’s torment, they would certainly cry, “Woe to us! We have really been wrongdoers.”
21|47|We will set up the scales of justice on the Day of Judgment, so no soul will be wronged in the least. And ˹even˺ if a deed is the weight of a mustard seed, We will bring it forth. And sufficient are We as a ˹vigilant˺ Reckoner
21|48|Indeed, We granted Moses and Aaron the standard ˹to distinguish between right and wrong˺—a light and a reminder for the righteous
21|49|who are in awe of their Lord without seeing Him, and are fearful of the Hour
21|50|And this ˹Quran˺ is a blessed reminder which We have revealed. Will you ˹pagans˺ then deny it
21|51|And indeed, We had granted Abraham sound judgment early on, for We knew him well ˹to be worthy of it˺
21|52|˹Remember˺ when he questioned his father and his people, “What are these statues to which you are so devoted?”
21|53|They replied, “We found our forefathers worshipping them.”
21|54|He responded, “Indeed, you and your forefathers have been clearly astray.”
21|55|They asked, “Have you come to us with the truth, or is this a joke?”
21|56|He replied, “In fact, your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, Who created them ˹both˺. And to that I bear witness.”
21|57|˹Then he said to himself,˺ “By God! I will surely plot against your idols after you have turned your backs and gone away.”
21|58|So he smashed them into pieces, except the biggest of them, so they might turn to it ˹for answers˺
21|59|They protested, “Who dared do this to our gods? It must be an evildoer!”
21|60|Some said, “We heard a young man, called Abraham, speaking ˹ill˺ of them.”
21|61|They demanded, “Bring him before the eyes of the people, so that they may witness ˹his trial˺.”
21|62|They asked, “Was it you who did this to our gods, O Abraham?”
21|63|He replied ˹sarcastically˺, “No, this one—the biggest of them—did it! So ask them, if they can talk!”
21|64|So they came back to their senses, saying ˹to one another˺, “You yourselves are truly the wrongdoers!”
21|65|Then they ˹quickly˺ regressed to their ˹original˺ mind-set, ˹arguing,˺ “You already know that those ˹idols˺ cannot talk.”
21|66|He rebuked ˹them˺, “Do you then worship—instead of God—what can neither benefit nor harm you in any way
21|67|Shame on you and whatever you worship instead of God! Do you not have any sense?”
21|68|They concluded, “Burn him up to avenge your gods, if you must act.”
21|69|We ordered, “O fire! Be cool and safe for Abraham!”
21|70|They had sought to harm him, but We made them the worst losers
21|71|Then We delivered him, along with Lot, to the land We had showered with blessings for all people
21|72|And We blessed him with Isaac ˹as a son˺ and Jacob ˹as a grandson˺, as an additional favour—making all of them righteous
21|73|We ˹also˺ made them leaders, guiding by Our command, and inspired them to do good deeds, establish prayer, and pay alms-tax. And they were devoted to Our worship
21|74|And to Lot We gave wisdom and knowledge, and delivered him from the society engrossed in shameful practices. They were certainly an evil, rebellious people
21|75|And We admitted him into Our mercy, ˹for˺ he was truly one of the righteous
21|76|And ˹remember˺ when Noah had cried out to Us earlier, so We responded to him and delivered him and his family from the great distress
21|77|And We made him prevail over those who had rejected Our signs. They were truly an evil people, so We drowned them all
21|78|And ˹remember˺ when David and Solomon passed judgment regarding the crops ruined ˹at night˺ by someone’s sheep, and We were witness to their judgments
21|79|We guided ˹young˺ Solomon to a fairer settlement, and granted each of them wisdom and knowledge. We subjected the mountains as well as the birds to hymn ˹Our praises˺ along with David. It is We Who did ˹it all˺
21|80|We taught him the art of making body armour to protect you in battle. Will you then be grateful
21|81|And to Solomon We subjected the raging winds, blowing by his command to the land We had showered with blessings. It is We Who know everything
21|82|And ˹We subjected˺ some jinn that dived for him, and performed other duties. It is We Who kept them in check
21|83|And ˹remember˺ when Job cried out to his Lord, “I have been touched with adversity, and You are the Most Merciful of the merciful.”
21|84|So We answered his prayer and removed his adversity, and gave him back his family, twice as many, as a mercy from Us and a lesson for the ˹devoted˺ worshippers
21|85|And ˹remember˺ Ishmael, Enoch, and Ⱬul-Kifl. They were all steadfast
21|86|We admitted them into Our mercy, for they were truly of the righteous
21|87|And ˹remember˺ when the Man of the Whale stormed off ˹from his city˺ in a rage, thinking We would not restrain him. Then in the ˹veils of˺ darkness he cried out, “There is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except You. Glory be to You! I have certainly done wrong.”
21|88|So We answered his prayer and rescued him from anguish. And so do We save the ˹true˺ believers
21|89|And ˹remember˺ when Zachariah cried out to his Lord, “My Lord! Do not leave me childless, though You are the Best of Successors.”
21|90|So We answered his prayer, granted him John, and made his wife fertile. Indeed, they used to race in doing good, and call upon Us with hope and fear, totally humbling themselves before Us
21|91|And ˹remember˺ the one who guarded her chastity, so We breathed into her through Our angel, ˹Gabriel,˺ making her and her son a sign for all peoples
21|92|˹O prophets!˺ Indeed, this religion of yours is ˹only˺ one, and I am your Lord, so worship Me ˹alone˺
21|93|Yet the people have divided it into sects. But to Us they will all return
21|94|So whoever does good and is a believer will never be denied ˹the reward for˺ their striving, for We are recording it all
21|95|It is impossible for a society which We have destroyed to ever rise again
21|96|until ˹after˺ Gog and Magog have broken loose ˹from the barrier˺, swarming down from every hill
21|97|ushering in the True Promise. Then—behold!—the disbelievers will stare ˹in horror, crying,˺ “Oh, woe to us! We have truly been heedless of this. In fact, we have been wrongdoers.”
21|98|Certainly you ˹disbelievers˺ and whatever you worship instead of God will be the fuel of Hell. You are ˹all˺ bound to enter it
21|99|Had those idols been ˹true˺ gods, they would not have entered it. And they will be there forever
21|100|In it they will groan, and will not be able to hear
21|101|Surely those for whom We have destined the finest reward will be kept far away from Hell
21|102|not even hearing the slightest hissing from it. And they will delight forever in what their souls desire
21|103|The Supreme Horror ˹of that Day˺ will not disturb them, and the angels will greet them, ˹saying,˺ “This is your Day, which you have been promised.”
21|104|On that Day We will roll up the heavens like a scroll of writings. Just as We produced the first creation, ˹so˺ shall We reproduce it. That is a promise binding on Us. We truly uphold ˹Our promises˺
21|105|Surely, following the ˹heavenly˺ Record, We decreed in the Scriptures: “My righteous servants shall inherit the land.”
21|106|Surely this ˹Quran˺ is sufficient ˹as a reminder˺ for those devoted to worship
21|107|We have sent you ˹O Prophet˺ only as a mercy for the whole world
21|108|Say, “What has been revealed to me is this: ‘Your God is only One God.’ Will you then submit?”
21|109|If they turn away, then say, “I have warned you all equally. I do not know if what you are threatened with is near or far
21|110|God surely knows what you say openly and whatever you hide
21|111|I do not know if this ˹delay˺ is possibly a test for you and an enjoyment for a while.”
21|112|˹In the end,˺ the Prophet said, “My Lord! Judge ˹between us˺ in truth. And our Lord is the Most Compassionate, Whose help is sought against what you claim.”
22|1|O humanity! Fear your Lord, for the ˹violent˺ quaking at the Hour is surely a dreadful thing
22|2|The Day you see it, every nursing mother will abandon what she is nursing, and every pregnant woman will deliver her burden ˹prematurely˺. And you will see people ˹as if they were˺ drunk, though they will not be drunk; but the torment of God is ˹terribly˺ severe
22|3|˹Still˺ there are some who dispute about God without knowledge, and follow every rebellious devil
22|4|It has been decreed for such devils that whoever takes them as a guide will be misguided and led by them into the torment of the Blaze
22|5|O humanity! If you are in doubt about the Resurrection, then ˹know that˺ We did create you from dust, then from a sperm-drop, then ˹developed you into˺ a clinging clot ˹of blood˺, then a lump of flesh—fully formed or unformed—in order to demonstrate ˹Our power˺ to you. ˹Then˺ We settle whatever ˹embryo˺ We will in the womb for an appointed term, then bring you forth as infants, so that you may reach your prime. Some of you ˹may˺ die ˹young˺, while others are left to reach the most feeble stage of life so that they may know nothing after having known much. And you see the earth lifeless, but as soon as We send down rain upon it, it begins to stir ˹to life˺ and swell, producing every type of pleasant plant
22|6|That is because God ˹alone˺ is the Truth, He ˹alone˺ gives life to the dead, and He ˹alone˺ is Most Capable of everything
22|7|And certainly the Hour is coming, there is no doubt about it. And God will surely resurrect those in the graves
22|8|˹Still˺ there are some who dispute about God without knowledge, guidance, or an enlightening scripture
22|9|turning away ˹in pride˺ to lead ˹others˺ astray from God’s Way. They will suffer disgrace in this world, and on the Day of Judgment We will make them taste the torment of burning
22|10|˹They will be told,˺ “This is ˹the reward˺ for what your hands have done. And God is never unjust to ˹His˺ creation.”
22|11|And there are some who worship God on the verge ˹of faith˺: if they are blessed with something good, they are content with it; but if they are afflicted with a trial, they relapse ˹into disbelief˺, losing this world and the Hereafter. That is ˹truly˺ the clearest loss
22|12|They call besides God what can neither harm nor benefit them. That is ˹truly˺ the farthest one can stray
22|13|They invoke those whose worship leads to harm, not benefit. What an evil patron and what an evil associate
22|14|Indeed, God will admit those who believe and do good into Gardens, under which rivers flow. Surely God does what He wills
22|15|Whoever thinks that God will not help His Prophet in this world and the Hereafter, let them stretch out a rope to the ceiling and strangle themselves, then let them see if this plan will do away with ˹the cause of˺ their rage
22|16|And so We revealed this ˹Quran˺ as clear verses. And God certainly guides whoever He wills
22|17|Indeed, the believers, Jews, Sabians, Christians, Magi, and the polytheists—God will judge between them ˹all˺ on Judgment Day. Surely God is a Witness over all things
22|18|Do you not see that to God bow down ˹in submission˺ all those in the heavens and all those on the earth, as well as the sun, the moon, the stars, the mountains, the trees, and ˹all˺ living beings, as well as many humans, while many are deserving of punishment. And whoever God disgraces, none can honour. Surely God does what He wills
22|19|These are two opposing groups that disagree about their Lord: as for the disbelievers, garments of Fire will be cut out for them and boiling water will be poured over their heads
22|20|melting whatever is in their bellies, along with their skin
22|21|And awaiting them are maces of iron
22|22|Whenever they try to escape from Hell—out of anguish—they will be forced back into it, ˹and will be told,˺ “Taste the torment of burning!”
22|23|˹But˺ God will surely admit those who believe and do good into Gardens, under which rivers flow, where they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls, and their clothing will be silk
22|24|for they have been guided to the best of speech, and they have been guided to the Commendable Path
22|25|Indeed, those who persist in disbelief and hinder ˹others˺ from the Way of God and from the Sacred Mosque—which We have appointed for all people, residents and visitors alike—along with whoever intends to deviate by doing wrong in it, We will cause them to taste a painful punishment
22|26|And ˹remember˺ when We assigned to Abraham the site of the House, ˹saying,˺ “Do not associate anything with Me ˹in worship˺ and purify My House for those who circle ˹the Ka’bah˺, stand ˹in prayer˺, and bow and prostrate themselves
22|27|Call ˹all˺ people to the pilgrimage. They will come to you on foot and on every lean camel from every distant path
22|28|so they may obtain the benefits ˹in store˺ for them, and pronounce the Name of God on appointed days over the sacrificial animals He has provided for them. So eat from their meat and feed the desperately poor
22|29|Then let them groom themselves, fulfil their vows, and circle the Ancient House.”
22|30|That is so. And whoever honours the rituals of God, it is best for them in the sight of their Lord. The ˹meat of˺ cattle has been made lawful for you, except what has ˹already˺ been recited to you. So shun the impurity of idolatry, and shun words of falsehood
22|31|Be upright ˹in devotion˺ to God, associating none with Him ˹in worship˺. For whoever associates ˹others˺ with God is like someone who has fallen from the sky and is either snatched away by birds or swept by the wind to a remote place
22|32|That is so. And whoever honours the symbols of God, it is certainly out of the piety of the heart
22|33|You may benefit from sacrificial animals for an appointed term, then their place of sacrifice is at the Ancient House
22|34|For every community We appointed a rite of sacrifice so that they may pronounce the Name of God over the sacrificial animals He has provided for them. For your God is only One God, so submit yourselves to Him ˹alone˺. And give good news ˹O Prophet˺ to the humble
22|35|those whose hearts tremble at the remembrance of God, who patiently endure whatever may befall them, and who establish prayer and donate from what We have provided for them
22|36|We have made sacrificial camels ˹and cattle˺ among the symbols of God, in which there is ˹much˺ good for you. So pronounce the Name of God over them when they are lined up ˹for sacrifice˺. Once they have fallen ˹lifeless˺ on their sides, you may eat from their meat, and feed the needy—those who do not beg, and those who do. In this way We have subjected these ˹animals˺ to you so that you may be grateful
22|37|Neither their meat nor blood reaches God. Rather, it is your piety that reaches Him. This is how He has subjected them to you so that you may proclaim the greatness of God for what He has guided you to, and give good news to the good-doers
22|38|Indeed, God defends those who believe. Surely God does not like whoever is deceitful, ungrateful
22|39|Permission ˹to fight back˺ is ˹hereby˺ granted to those being fought, for they have been wronged. And God is truly Most Capable of helping them ˹prevail˺
22|40|˹They are˺ those who have been expelled from their homes for no reason other than proclaiming: “Our Lord is God.” Had God not repelled ˹the aggression of˺ some people by means of others, destruction would have surely claimed monasteries, churches, synagogues, and mosques in which God’s Name is often mentioned. God will certainly help those who stand up for Him. God is truly All-Powerful, Almighty
22|41|˹They are˺ those who, if established in the land by Us, would perform prayer, pay alms-tax, encourage what is good, and forbid what is evil. And with God rests the outcome of all affairs
22|42|If they deny you ˹O Prophet˺, so did the people of Noah before them, as well as ˹the tribes of˺ ’Ȃd and Thamûd
22|43|the people of Abraham, the people of Lot
22|44|and the residents of Midian. And Moses was denied ˹too˺. But I delayed ˹the fate of˺ the disbelievers ˹until their appointed time˺ then seized them. And how severe was My response
22|45|Many are the societies We have destroyed for persisting in wrongdoing, leaving them in total ruin. ˹Many are˺ also the abandoned wells and lofty palaces
22|46|Have they not travelled throughout the land so their hearts may reason, and their ears may listen? Indeed, it is not the eyes that are blind, but it is the hearts in the chests that grow blind
22|47|They challenge you ˹O Prophet˺ to hasten the torment. And God will never fail in His promise. But a day with your Lord is indeed like a thousand years by your counting
22|48|Many are the societies whose end We delayed while they did wrong, then seized them. And to Me is the final return
22|49|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “O humanity! I am only sent to you with a clear warning
22|50|So those who believe and do good will have forgiveness and an honourable provision
22|51|But those who strive to discredit Our revelations, they will be the residents of the Hellfire.”
22|52|Whenever We sent a messenger or a prophet before you ˹O Prophet˺ and he recited ˹Our revelations˺, Satan would influence ˹people’s understanding of˺ his recitation. But ˹eventually˺ God would eliminate Satan’s influence. Then God would ˹firmly˺ establish His revelations. And God is All-Knowing, All-Wise
22|53|All that so He may make Satan’s influence a trial for those ˹hypocrites˺ whose hearts are sick and those ˹disbelievers˺ whose hearts are hardened. Surely the wrongdoers are totally engrossed in opposition
22|54|˹This is˺ also so that those gifted with knowledge would know that this ˹revelation˺ is the truth from your Lord, so they have faith in it, and so their hearts would submit humbly to it. And God surely guides the believers to the Straight Path
22|55|Yet the disbelievers will persist in doubt about this ˹revelation˺ until the Hour takes them by surprise, or the torment of a terminating Day comes to them
22|56|All authority on that Day is for God ˹alone˺. He will judge between them. So those who believe and do good will be in the Gardens of Bliss
22|57|But those who disbelieve and deny Our revelations, it is they who will suffer a humiliating punishment
22|58|As for those who emigrate in the cause of God and then are martyred or die, God will indeed grant them a good provision. Surely God is the Best Provider
22|59|He will certainly admit them into a place they will be pleased with. For God is truly All-Knowing, Most Forbearing
22|60|That is so. And whoever retaliates in equivalence to the injury they have received, and then are wronged ˹again˺, God will certainly help them. Surely God is Ever-Pardoning, All-Forgiving
22|61|That is because God causes the night to merge into the day, and the day into the night. Indeed, God is All-Hearing, All-Seeing
22|62|That is because God ˹alone˺ is the Truth and what they invoke besides Him is falsehood, and God ˹alone˺ is truly the Most High, All-Great
22|63|Do you not see that God sends down rain from the sky, then the earth becomes green? Surely God is Most Subtle, All-Aware
22|64|To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. God ˹alone˺ is truly the Self-Sufficient, Praiseworthy
22|65|Do you not see that God has subjected to you whatever is in the earth as well as the ships ˹that˺ sail through the sea by His command? He keeps the sky from falling down on the earth except by His permission. Surely God is Ever Gracious and Most Merciful to humanity
22|66|And He is the One Who gave you life, then will cause you to die, and then will bring you back to life. ˹But˺ surely humankind is ever ungrateful
22|67|For every community We appointed a code of life to follow. So do not let them dispute with you ˹O Prophet˺ in this matter. And invite ˹all˺ to your Lord, for you are truly on the Right Guidance
22|68|But if they argue with you, then say, “God knows best what you do.”
22|69|God will judge between you ˹all˺ on Judgment Day regarding your differences
22|70|Do you not know that God ˹fully˺ knows whatever is in the heavens and the earth? Surely it is all ˹written˺ in a Record. That is certainly easy for God
22|71|Yet they worship besides God that for which He has sent down no authority, and of which they have no knowledge. The wrongdoers will have no helper
22|72|Whenever Our clear revelations are recited to them, you ˹O Prophet˺ recognize rage on the faces of the disbelievers, as if they are going to snap at those who recite Our revelations to them. Say, “Shall I inform you of something far more enraging than that? ˹It is˺ the Fire with which God has threatened those who disbelieve. What an evil destination!”
22|73|O humanity! A lesson is set forth, so listen to it ˹carefully˺: those ˹idols˺ you invoke besides God can never create ˹so much as˺ a fly, even if they ˹all˺ were to come together for that. And if a fly were to snatch anything away from them, they cannot ˹even˺ retrieve it from the fly. How powerless are those who invoke and those invoked
22|74|They have not shown God the reverence He deserves. Surely God is All-Powerful, Almighty
22|75|God selects messengers from both angels and people, for God is truly All-Hearing, All-Seeing
22|76|He knows what is ahead of them and what is behind them. And to God ˹all˺ matters will be returned ˹for judgment˺
22|77|O believers! Bow down, prostrate yourselves, worship your Lord, and do ˹what is˺ good so that you may be successful
22|78|Strive for ˹the cause of˺ God in the way He deserves, for ˹it is˺ He ˹Who˺ has chosen you, and laid upon you no hardship in the religion—the way of your forefather Abraham. ˹It is God˺ Who named you ‘the ones who submit’ ˹in the˺ earlier ˹Scriptures˺ and in this ˹Quran˺, so that the Messenger may be a witness over you, and that you may be witnesses over humanity. So establish prayer, pay alms-tax, and hold fast to God. He ˹alone˺ is your Guardian. What an excellent Guardian, and what an excellent Helper
23|1|Successful indeed are the believers
23|2|those who humble themselves in prayer
23|3|those who avoid idle talk
23|4|those who pay alms-tax
23|5|those who guard their chastity
23|6|except with their wives or those ˹bondwomen˺ in their possession, for then they are free from blame
23|7|but whoever seeks beyond that are the transgressors
23|8|˹the believers are also˺ those who are true to their trusts and covenants
23|9|and those who are ˹properly˺ observant of their prayers
23|10|These are the ones who will be awarded
23|11|Paradise as their own. They will be there forever
23|12|And indeed, We created humankind from an extract of clay
23|13|then placed each ˹human˺ as a sperm-drop in a secure place
23|14|then We developed the drop into a clinging clot ˹of blood˺, then developed the clot into a lump ˹of flesh˺, then developed the lump into bones, then clothed the bones with flesh, then We brought it into being as a new creation. So Blessed is God, the Best of Creators
23|15|After that you will surely die
23|16|then on the Day of Judgment you will be resurrected
23|17|And indeed, We created above you seven levels ˹of heaven˺. We are never unmindful of ˹Our˺ creation
23|18|We send down rain from the sky in perfect measure, causing it to soak into the earth. And We are surely able to take it away
23|19|With it We produce for you gardens of palm trees and grapevines, in which there are abundant fruits, and from which you may eat
23|20|as well as ˹olive˺ trees which grow at Mount Sinai, providing oil and a condiment to eat
23|21|And there is certainly a lesson for you in cattle, from whose bellies We give you ˹milk˺ to drink, and in them are many other benefits for you, and from them you may eat
23|22|And you are carried upon ˹some of˺ them and upon ships
23|23|Indeed, We sent Noah to his people. He declared, “O my people! Worship God ˹alone˺. You have no god other than Him. Will you not then fear ˹Him˺?”
23|24|But the disbelieving chiefs of his people said ˹to the masses˺, “This is only a human like you, who wants to be superior to you. Had God willed, He could have easily sent down angels ˹instead˺. We have never heard of this in ˹the history of˺ our forefathers
23|25|He is simply insane, so bear with him for a while.”
23|26|Noah prayed, “My Lord! Help me, because they have denied ˹me˺.”
23|27|So We inspired him: “Build the Ark under Our ˹watchful˺ Eyes and directions. Then when Our command comes and the oven bursts ˹with water˺, take on board a pair from every species along with your family—except those against whom the decree ˹to drown˺ has already been passed. And do not plead with Me for those who have done wrong, for they will surely be drowned.”
23|28|Then when you and those with you have settled in the Ark, say, “All praise is for God, Who saved us from the wrongdoing people.”
23|29|And pray, “My Lord! Allow me a blessed landing, for You are the best accommodator.”
23|30|Surely in this are lessons. And We ˹always˺ put ˹people˺ to the test
23|31|Then We raised another generation after them
23|32|and sent to them a messenger from among themselves, ˹declaring,˺ “Worship God ˹alone˺. You have no god other than Him. Will you not then fear ˹Him˺?”
23|33|But the chiefs of his people—who disbelieved, denied the meeting ˹with God˺ in the Hereafter, and were spoiled by the worldly luxuries We had provided for them—said ˹to the masses˺, “This is only a human like you. He eats what you eat, and drinks what you drink
23|34|And if you ˹ever˺ obey a human like yourselves, then you would certainly be losers
23|35|Does he promise you that once you are dead and reduced to dust and bones, you will be brought forth ˹alive˺
23|36|Impossible, simply impossible is what you are promised
23|37|There is nothing beyond our worldly life. We die, others are born, and none will be resurrected
23|38|He is no more than a man who has fabricated a lie about God, and we will never believe in him.”
23|39|The messenger prayed, “My Lord! Help me, because they have denied ˹me˺.”
23|40|God responded, “Soon they will be truly regretful.”
23|41|Then the ˹mighty˺ blast overtook them with justice, and We reduced them to rubble. So away with the wrongdoing people
23|42|Then We raised other generations after them
23|43|No people can advance their doom, nor can they delay it
23|44|Then We sent Our messengers in succession: whenever a messenger came to his people, they denied him. So We destroyed them, one after the other, reducing them to ˹cautionary˺ tales. So away with the people who refuse to believe
23|45|Then We sent Moses and his brother Aaron with Our signs and compelling proof
23|46|to Pharaoh and his chiefs, but they behaved arrogantly and were a tyrannical people
23|47|They argued, “Will we believe in two humans, like ourselves, whose people are slaves to us?”
23|48|So they rejected them both, and ˹so˺ were among those destroyed
23|49|And We certainly gave Moses the Scripture, so perhaps his people would be ˹rightly˺ guided
23|50|And We made the son of Mary and his mother a sign, and gave them refuge on high ground—a ˹suitable˺ place for rest with flowing water
23|51|O messengers! Eat from what is good and lawful, and act righteously. Indeed, I fully know what you do
23|52|Surely this religion of yours is ˹only˺ one, and I am your Lord, so fear Me ˹alone˺
23|53|Yet the people have divided it into different sects, each rejoicing in what they have
23|54|So leave them ˹O Prophet˺ in their heedlessness for a while
23|55|Do they think, since We provide them with wealth and children
23|56|that We hasten to ˹honour˺ them ˹with˺ all kinds of good? No! They are not aware
23|57|Surely those who tremble in awe of their Lord
23|58|and who believe in the revelations of their Lord
23|59|and who associate none with their Lord
23|60|and who do whatever ˹good˺ they do with their hearts fearful, ˹knowing˺ that they will return to their Lord—
23|61|it is they who race to do good deeds, always taking the lead
23|62|We never require of any soul more than what it can afford. And with Us is a record which speaks the truth. None will be wronged
23|63|But the hearts of those ˹who disbelieve˺ are oblivious to ˹all of˺ this, and they have other ˹evil˺ deeds, opposite to this, in which they are engrossed
23|64|But as soon as We seize their elite with torment, they start to cry for help
23|65|˹They will be told,˺ “Do not cry for help today. Surely you will never be saved from Us
23|66|Indeed, My revelations were recited to you, but you used to back away ˹in disgust˺
23|67|boasting of the Sacred House, and babbling ˹nonsense about the Quran˺ by night.”
23|68|Is it because they have never contemplated the Word ˹of God˺? Or ˹because˺ there has come to them something that did not come to their forefathers
23|69|Or ˹because˺ they failed to recognize their Messenger, and so they denied him
23|70|Or ˹because˺ they say, “He is insane?” In fact, he has come to them with the truth, but most of them are resentful of the truth
23|71|Had the truth followed their desires, the heavens, the earth, and all those in them would have certainly been corrupted. In fact, We have brought them ˹the means to˺ their glory, but they turn away from it
23|72|Or ˹is it because˺ you ˹O Prophet˺ are asking them for tribute? But the reward of your Lord is best, for He is the Best Provider
23|73|And surely you are calling them to the Straight Path
23|74|but those who disbelieve in the Hereafter are certainly deviating from that Path
23|75|˹Even˺ if We had mercy on them and removed their affliction, they would still persist in their transgression, wandering blindly
23|76|And We have already seized them with torment, but they never humbled themselves to their Lord, nor did they ˹submissively˺ appeal ˹to Him˺
23|77|But as soon as We open for them a gate of severe punishment, they will be utterly desperate
23|78|He is the One Who created for you hearing, sight, and intellect. ˹Yet˺ you hardly give any thanks
23|79|And He is the One Who has dispersed you ˹all˺ over the earth, and to Him you will ˹all˺ be gathered
23|80|And He is the One Who gives life and causes death, and to Him belongs the alternation of the day and night. Will you not then understand
23|81|But they ˹just˺ say what their predecessors said
23|82|They said, “Once we are dead and reduced to dust and bones, will we really be resurrected
23|83|We have already been promised this, as well as our forefathers earlier. This is nothing but ancient fables!”
23|84|Ask ˹them, O Prophet˺, “To whom belong the earth and all those on it, if you ˹really˺ know?”
23|85|They will reply, “To God!” Say, “Why are you not then mindful?”
23|86|˹And˺ ask ˹them˺, “Who is the Lord of the seven heavens and the Lord of the Mighty Throne?”
23|87|They will reply, “God.” Say, “Will you not then fear ˹Him˺?”
23|88|Ask ˹them also,˺ “In Whose Hands is the authority over all things, protecting ˹all˺ while none can protect against Him, if you ˹really˺ know?”
23|89|They will reply, “God.” Say, “How are you then so deluded?”
23|90|In fact, We have brought them the truth, and they are certainly liars
23|91|God has never had ˹any˺ offspring, nor is there any god besides Him. Otherwise, each god would have taken away what he created, and they would have tried to dominate one another. Glorified is God above what they claim
23|92|˹He is the˺ Knower of the seen and unseen. Exalted is He above what they associate ˹with Him˺
23|93|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “My Lord! Should You show me what they are threatened with
23|94|then, my Lord, do not count me among the wrongdoing people.”
23|95|We are indeed able to show you what We have threatened them with
23|96|Respond to evil with what is best. We know well what they claim
23|97|And say, “My Lord! I seek refuge in You from the temptations of the devils
23|98|And I seek refuge in You, my Lord, that they ˹even˺ come near me.”
23|99|When death approaches any of them, they cry, “My Lord! Let me go back
23|100|so I may do good in what I left behind.” Never! It is only a ˹useless˺ appeal they make. And there is a barrier behind them until the Day they are resurrected
23|101|Then, when the Trumpet will be blown, there will be no kinship between them on that Day, nor will they ˹even care to˺ ask about one another
23|102|As for those whose scale is heavy ˹with good deeds˺, it is they who will be successful
23|103|But those whose scale is light, they will have doomed themselves, staying in Hell forever
23|104|The Fire will burn their faces, leaving them deformed
23|105|˹It will be said,˺ “Were My revelations not recited to you, but you used to deny them?”
23|106|They will cry, “Our Lord! Our ill-fate took hold of us, so we became a misguided people
23|107|Our Lord! Take us out of this ˹Fire˺. Then if we ever return ˹to denial˺, we will truly be wrongdoers.”
23|108|God will respond, “Be despised in there! Do not ˹ever˺ plead with Me ˹again˺
23|109|Indeed, there was a group of My servants who used to pray, ‘Our Lord! We have believed, so forgive us and have mercy on us, for You are the best of those who show mercy,’
23|110|but you were ˹so busy˺ making fun of them that it made you forget My remembrance. And you used to laugh at them
23|111|Today I have indeed rewarded them for their perseverance: they are certainly the triumphant.”
23|112|He will ask ˹them˺, “How many years did you remain on earth?”
23|113|They will reply, “We remained ˹only˺ a day or part of a day. But ask those who kept count.”
23|114|He will say, “You only remained for a little while, if only you knew
23|115|Did you then think that We had created you without purpose, and that you would never be returned to Us?”
23|116|Exalted is God, the True King! There is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him, the Lord of the Honourable Throne
23|117|Whoever invokes, besides God, another god—for which they can have no proof—they will surely find their penalty with their Lord. Indeed, the disbelievers will never succeed
23|118|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “My Lord! Forgive and have mercy, for You are the best of those who show mercy.”
24|1|˹This is˺ a sûrah which We have revealed and made ˹its rulings˺ obligatory, and revealed in it clear commandments so that you may be mindful
24|2|As for female and male fornicators, give each of them one hundred lashes, and do not let pity for them make you lenient in ˹enforcing˺ the law of God, if you ˹truly˺ believe in God and the Last Day. And let a number of believers witness their punishment
24|3|A male fornicator would only marry a female fornicator or idolatress. And a female fornicator would only be married to a fornicator or idolater. This is ˹all˺ forbidden to the believers
24|4|Those who accuse chaste women ˹of adultery˺ and fail to produce four witnesses, give them eighty lashes ˹each˺. And do not ever accept any testimony from them—for they are indeed the rebellious—
24|5|except those who repent afterwards and mend their ways, then surely God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
24|6|And those who accuse their wives ˹of adultery˺ but have no witness except themselves, the accuser must testify, swearing four times by God that he is telling the truth
24|7|and a fifth oath that God may condemn him if he is lying
24|8|For her to be spared the punishment, she must swear four times by God that he is telling a lie
24|9|and a fifth oath that God may be displeased with her if he is telling the truth
24|10|˹You would have suffered,˺ had it not been for God’s grace and mercy upon you, and had God not been Accepting of Repentance, All-Wise
24|11|Indeed, those who came up with that ˹outrageous˺ slander are a group of you. Do not think this is bad for you. Rather, it is good for you. They will be punished, each according to their share of the sin. As for their mastermind, he will suffer a tremendous punishment
24|12|If only the believing men and women had thought well of one another, when you heard this ˹rumour˺, and said, “This is clearly ˹an outrageous˺ slander!”
24|13|Why did they not produce four witnesses? Now, since they have failed to produce witnesses, they are ˹truly˺ liars in the sight of God
24|14|Had it not been for God’s grace and mercy upon you in this world and the Hereafter, you would have certainly been touched with a tremendous punishment for what you plunged into—
24|15|when you passed it from one tongue to the other, and said with your mouths what you had no knowledge of, taking it lightly while it is ˹extremely˺ serious in the sight of God
24|16|If only you had said upon hearing it, “How can we speak about such a thing! Glory be to You ˹O Lord˺! This is a heinous slander!”
24|17|God forbids you from ever doing something like this again, if you are ˹true˺ believers
24|18|And God makes ˹His˺ commandments clear to you, for God is All-Knowing, All-Wise
24|19|Indeed, those who love to see indecency spread among the believers will suffer a painful punishment in this life and the Hereafter. God knows and you do not know
24|20|˹You would have suffered,˺ had it not been for God’s grace and mercy upon you, and had God not been Ever Gracious, Most Merciful
24|21|O believers! Do not follow the footsteps of Satan. Whoever follows Satan’s footsteps, then ˹let them know that˺ he surely bids ˹all to˺ immorality and wickedness. Had it not been for God’s grace and mercy upon you, none of you would have ever been purified. But God purifies whoever He wills. And God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing
24|22|Do not let the people of virtue and affluence among you swear to suspend donations to their relatives, the needy, and the emigrants in the cause of God. Let them pardon and forgive. Do you not love to be forgiven by God? And God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
24|23|Surely those who accuse chaste, unsuspecting, believing women are cursed in this life and the Hereafter. And they will suffer a tremendous punishment
24|24|on the Day their tongues, hands, and feet will testify against them for what they used to do
24|25|On that Day, God will give them their just penalty in full, and they will ˹come to˺ know that God ˹alone˺ is the Ultimate Truth
24|26|Wicked women are for wicked men, and wicked men are for wicked women. And virtuous women are for virtuous men, and virtuous men are for virtuous women. The virtuous are innocent of what the wicked say. They will have forgiveness and an honourable provision
24|27|O believers! Do not enter any house other than your own until you have asked for permission and greeted its occupants. This is best for you, so perhaps you will be mindful
24|28|If you find no one at home, do not enter it until you have been given permission. And if you are asked to leave, then leave. That is purer for you. And God has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of what you do
24|29|There is no blame on you if you enter public places where there is something of benefit for you. And God knows what you reveal and what you conceal
24|30|˹O Prophet!˺ Tell the believing men to lower their gaze and guard their chastity. That is purer for them. Surely God is All-Aware of what they do
24|31|And tell the believing women to lower their gaze and guard their chastity, and not to reveal their adornments except what normally appears. Let them draw their veils over their chests, and not reveal their ˹hidden˺ adornments except to their husbands, their fathers, their fathers-in-law, their sons, their stepsons, their brothers, their brothers’ sons or sisters’ sons, their fellow women, those ˹bondwomen˺ in their possession, male attendants with no desire, or children who are still unaware of women’s nakedness. Let them not stomp their feet, drawing attention to their hidden adornments. Turn to God in repentance all together, O believers, so that you may be successful
24|32|Marry off the ˹free˺ singles among you, as well as the righteous of your bondmen and bondwomen. If they are poor, God will enrich them out of His bounty. For God is All-Bountiful, All-Knowing
24|33|And let those who do not have the means to marry keep themselves chaste until God enriches them out of His bounty. And if any of those ˹bondspeople˺ in your possession desires a deed of emancipation, make it possible for them, if you find goodness in them. And give them some of God’s wealth which He has granted you. Do not force your ˹slave˺ girls into prostitution for your own worldly gains while they wish to remain chaste. And if someone coerces them, then after such a coercion God is certainly All-Forgiving, Most Merciful ˹to them˺
24|34|Indeed, We have sent down to you clear revelations, along with examples of those who had gone before you, and a lesson to the God-fearing
24|35|God is the Light of the heavens and the earth. His light is like a niche in which there is a lamp, the lamp is in a crystal, the crystal is like a shining star, lit from ˹the oil of˺ a blessed olive tree, ˹located˺ neither to the east nor the west, whose oil would almost glow, even without being touched by fire. Light upon light! God guides whoever He wills to His light. And God sets forth parables for humanity. For God has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all things
24|36|˹That light shines˺ through houses ˹of worship˺ which God has ordered to be raised, and where His Name is mentioned. He is glorified there morning and evening
24|37|by men who are not distracted—either by buying or selling—from God’s remembrance, or performing prayer, or paying alms-tax. They fear a Day when hearts and eyes will tremble
24|38|˹hoping˺ that God may reward them according to the best of their deeds, and increase them out of His grace. And God provides for whoever He wills without limit
24|39|As for the disbelievers, their deeds are like a mirage in a desert, which the thirsty perceive as water, but when they approach it, they find it to be nothing. Instead, they find God there ˹in the Hereafter, ready˺ to settle their account. And God is swift in reckoning
24|40|Or ˹their deeds are˺ like the darkness in a deep sea, covered by waves upon waves, topped by ˹dark˺ clouds. Darkness upon darkness! If one stretches out their hand, they can hardly see it. And whoever God does not bless with light will have no light
24|41|Do you not see that God is glorified by all those in the heavens and the earth, even the birds as they soar? Each ˹instinctively˺ knows their manner of prayer and glorification. And God has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all they do
24|42|To God ˹alone˺ belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. And to God is the final return
24|43|Do you not see that God gently drives the clouds, then joins them together, piling them up into masses, from which you see raindrops come forth? And He sends down from the sky mountains ˹of clouds˺ loaded with hail, pouring it on whoever He wills and averting it from whoever He wills. The flash of the clouds’ lightning nearly takes away eyesight
24|44|God alternates the day and night. Surely in this is a lesson for people of insight
24|45|And God has created from water every living creature. Some of them crawl on their bellies, some walk on two legs, and some walk on four. God creates whatever He wills. Surely God is Most Capable of everything
24|46|We have indeed sent down revelations clarifying ˹the truth˺. But God ˹only˺ guides whoever He wills to the Straight Path
24|47|And the hypocrites say, “We believe in God and the Messenger, and we obey.” Then a group of them turns away soon after that. These are not ˹true˺ believers
24|48|And as soon as they are called to God and His Messenger so he may judge between them, a group of them turns away
24|49|But if the truth is in their favour, they come to him, fully submitting
24|50|Is there a sickness in their hearts? Or are they in doubt? Or do they fear that God and His Messenger will be unjust to them? In fact, it is they who are the ˹true˺ wrongdoers
24|51|The only response of the ˹true˺ believers, when they are called to God and His Messenger so he may judge between them, is to say, “We hear and obey.” It is they who will ˹truly˺ succeed
24|52|For whoever obeys God and His Messenger, and fears God and is mindful of Him, then it is they who will ˹truly˺ triumph
24|53|They swear by God their most solemn oaths that if you ˹O Prophet˺ were to command them, they would certainly march forth ˹in God’s cause˺. Say, “˹You˺ do not ˹have to˺ swear; your obedience is well known!” Surely God is All-Aware of what you do.”
24|54|Say, “Obey God and obey the Messenger. But if you turn away, then he is only responsible for his duty and you are responsible for yours. And if you obey him, you will be ˹rightly˺ guided. The Messenger’s duty is only to deliver ˹the message˺ clearly.”
24|55|God has promised those of you who believe and do good that He will certainly make them successors in the land, as He did with those before them; and will surely establish for them their faith which He has chosen for them; and will indeed change their fear into security—˹provided that˺ they worship Me, associating nothing with Me. But whoever disbelieves after this ˹promise˺, it is they who will be the rebellious
24|56|Moreover, establish prayer, pay alms-tax, and obey the Messenger, so you may be shown mercy
24|57|Do not think ˹O Prophet˺ that the disbelievers can escape in the land. The Fire will be their home. Indeed, what an evil destination
24|58|O believers! Let those ˹bondspeople˺ in your possession and those of you who are still under age ask for your permission ˹to come in˺ at three times: before dawn prayer, when you take off your ˹outer˺ clothes at noon, and after the late evening prayer. ˹These are˺ three times of privacy for you. Other than these times, there is no blame on you or them to move freely, attending to one another. This is how God makes the revelations clear to you, for God is All-Knowing, All-Wise
24|59|And when your children reach the age of puberty, let them seek permission ˹to come in˺, as their seniors do. This is how God makes His revelations clear to you, for God is All-Knowing, All-Wise
24|60|As for elderly women past the age of marriage, there is no blame on them if they take off their ˹outer˺ garments, without revealing their adornments. But it is better for them if they avoid this ˹altogether˺. And God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing
24|61|There is no restriction on the blind, or the disabled, or the sick. Nor on yourselves if you eat from your homes, or the homes of your fathers, or your mothers, or your brothers, or your sisters, or your paternal uncles, or your paternal aunts, or your maternal uncles, or your maternal aunts, or from the homes in your trust, or ˹the homes of˺ your friends. There is no blame on you eating together or separately. However, when you enter houses, greet one another with a greeting ˹of peace˺ from God, blessed and good. This is how God makes His revelations clear to you, so perhaps you will understand
24|62|The ˹true˺ believers are only those who believe in God and His Messenger, and when they are with him on a public matter, they do not leave without his permission. Indeed, those who ask your permission ˹O Prophet˺ are the ones who ˹truly˺ believe in God and His Messenger. So when they ask your permission for a private matter, grant permission to whoever you wish and ask God’s forgiveness for them. Surely God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
24|63|Do not treat the Messenger’s summons to you ˹as lightly˺ as your summons to one another. God certainly knows those of you who slip away, hiding behind others. So let those who disobey his orders beware, for an affliction may befall them, or a painful torment may overtake them
24|64|Surely to God belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth. He knows well what you stand for. And ˹on˺ the Day all will be returned to Him, He will inform them of what they did. For God has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all things
25|1|Blessed is the One Who sent down the Standard to His servant, so that he may be a warner to the whole world
25|2|˹God is˺ the One to Whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, Who has never had ˹any˺ offspring, nor does He have a partner in ˹governing˺ the kingdom. He has created everything, ordaining it precisely
25|3|Yet they have taken besides Him gods who cannot create anything but are themselves created. Nor can they protect or benefit themselves. Nor can they control life, death, or resurrection
25|4|The disbelievers say, “This ˹Quran˺ is nothing but a fabrication which he made up with the help of others.” Their claim is totally unjustified and untrue
25|5|And they say, “˹These revelations are only˺ ancient fables which he has had written down, and they are rehearsed to him morning and evening.”
25|6|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “This ˹Quran˺ has been revealed by the One Who knows the secrets of the heavens and the earth. Surely He is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful.”
25|7|And they say ˹mockingly˺, “What kind of messenger is this who eats food and goes about in market-places ˹for a living˺? If only an angel had been sent down with him to be his co-warner
25|8|or a treasure had been cast down to him, or he had had a garden from which he may eat!” And the wrongdoers say ˹to the believers˺, “You are only following a bewitched man.”
25|9|See ˹O Prophet˺ how they call you names! So they have gone so ˹far˺ astray that they cannot find the ˹Right˺ Way
25|10|Blessed is the One Who—if He wills—can give you far better than ˹all˺ that: gardens under which rivers flow, and palaces as well
25|11|In fact, they deny the Hour. And for the deniers of the Hour, We have prepared a blazing Fire
25|12|Once it sees them from a distance, they will hear it fuming and growling
25|13|And when they are tossed into a narrow place inside ˹Hell˺, chained together, then and there they will cry out for ˹instant˺ destruction
25|14|˹They will be told,˺ “Do not cry only once for destruction, but cry many times over!”
25|15|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Is this better or the Garden of Eternity which the righteous have been promised, as a reward and ˹an ultimate˺ destination
25|16|There they will have whatever they wish for, forever. That is a promise ˹to be sought after˺, binding on your Lord.”
25|17|˹Watch for˺ the Day He will gather them along with what they used to worship besides God, and ask ˹the objects of worship˺, “Was it you who misled these servants of Mine, or did they stray from the Way ˹on their own˺?”
25|18|They will say, “Glory be to You! It was not right for ˹others like˺ us to take any lords besides You, but You allowed enjoyment for them and their forefathers ˹for so long˺ that they forgot ˹Your˺ remembrance and became a doomed people.”
25|19|˹The doomed will be told˺, “Your gods have clearly denied your claims. So now you can neither ward off ˹the punishment˺ nor get any help.” And whoever of you does wrong, We will make them taste a horrible punishment
25|20|We never sent any messenger before you ˹O Prophet˺, who did not eat food and go about in market-places. We have made some of you a trial for others. Will you ˹not then˺ be patient? And your Lord is All-Seeing
25|21|Those who do not expect to meet Us say, “If only the angels were sent down to us, or we could see our Lord!” They have certainly been carried away by their arrogance and have entirely exceeded all limits
25|22|˹But˺ on the Day they will see the angels, there will be no good news for the wicked, who will cry, “Keep away! Away ˹from us˺!”
25|23|Then We will turn to whatever ˹good˺ deeds they did, reducing them to scattered dust
25|24|˹But˺ on that Day the residents of Paradise will have the best settlement and the finest place to rest
25|25|˹Watch for˺ the Day the heavens will burst with clouds, and the angels will be sent down in successive ranks
25|26|True authority on that Day will belong ˹only˺ to the Most Compassionate. And it will be a hard day for the disbelievers
25|27|And ˹beware of˺ the Day the wrongdoer will bite his nails ˹in regret˺ and say, “Oh! I wish I had followed the Way along with the Messenger
25|28|Woe to me! I wish I had never taken so-and-so as a close friend
25|29|It was he who truly made me stray from the Reminder after it had reached me.” And Satan has always betrayed humanity
25|30|The Messenger has cried, “O my Lord! My people have indeed received this Quran with neglect.”
25|31|Similarly, We made enemies for every prophet from among the wicked, but sufficient is your Lord as a Guide and Helper
25|32|The disbelievers say, “If only the Quran had been sent down to him all at once!” ˹We have sent it˺ as such ˹in stages˺ so We may reassure your heart with it. And We have revealed it at a deliberate pace
25|33|Whenever they bring you an argument, We come to you with the right refutation and the best explanation
25|34|Those who will be dragged into Hell on their faces will be in the worst place, and are ˹now˺ farthest from the ˹Right˺ Way
25|35|We certainly gave Moses the Book and appointed his brother Aaron as his helper
25|36|We had ordered ˹them˺, “Go to the people who would deny Our signs.” Then We annihilated the deniers entirely
25|37|And when the people of Noah rejected the messengers, We drowned them, making them an example to humanity. And We have prepared a painful punishment for the wrongdoers
25|38|Also ˹We destroyed˺ ’Ȃd, Thamûd, and the people of the Water-pit, as well as many peoples in between
25|39|For each We set forth ˹various˺ lessons, and We ultimately destroyed each
25|40|They have certainly passed by the city ˹of Sodom˺, which had been showered with a dreadful rain ˹of stones˺. Have they not seen its ruins? But they do not expect to be resurrected
25|41|When they see you ˹O Prophet˺, they only make fun of you, ˹saying,˺ “Is this the one that God has sent as a messenger
25|42|He would have almost tricked us away from our gods, had we not been so devoted to them.” ˹But˺ soon they will know, when they face the punishment, who is far astray from the ˹Right˺ Way
25|43|Have you seen ˹O Prophet˺ the one who has taken their own desires as their god? Will you then be a keeper over them
25|44|Or do you think that most of them listen or understand? They are only like cattle—no, more than that, they are astray from the ˹Right˺ Way
25|45|Have you not seen how your Lord extends the shade—He could have simply made it ˹remain˺ still if He so willed—then We make the sun its guide
25|46|causing the shade to retreat gradually
25|47|He is the One Who has made the night for you as a cover, and ˹made˺ sleep for resting, and the day for rising
25|48|And He is the One Who sends the winds ushering in His mercy, and We send down pure rain from the sky
25|49|giving life to a lifeless land, and providing water for countless animals and humans of Our Own creation
25|50|We certainly disperse it among them so they may be mindful, but most people persist in ungratefulness
25|51|Had We willed, We could have easily sent a warner to every society
25|52|So do not yield to the disbelievers, but strive diligently against them with this ˹Quran˺
25|53|And He is the One Who merges the two bodies of water: one fresh and palatable and the other salty and bitter, placing between them a barrier they cannot cross
25|54|And He is the One Who creates human beings from a ˹humble˺ liquid, then establishes for them bonds of kinship and marriage. For your Lord is Most Capable
25|55|Yet they worship besides God what can neither benefit nor harm them. And the disbeliever always collaborates against their Lord
25|56|And We have sent you ˹O Prophet˺ only as a deliverer of good news and a warner
25|57|Say, “I do not ask you for any reward for this ˹message˺, but whoever wishes, let them pursue the Way to their Lord.”
25|58|Put your trust in the Ever-Living, Who never dies, and glorify His praises. Sufficient is He as All-Aware of the sins of His servants
25|59|˹He is˺ the One Who created the heavens and the earth and everything in between in six Days, then established Himself on the Throne. ˹He is˺ the Most Compassionate! Ask ˹none other than˺ the All-Knowledgeable about Himself
25|60|When it is said to them, “Prostrate to the Most Compassionate,” they ask ˹in disgust˺, “What is ‘the Most Compassionate’? Will we prostrate to whatever you order us to?” And it only drives them farther away
25|61|Blessed is the One Who has placed constellations in the sky, as well as a ˹radiant˺ lamp and a luminous moon
25|62|And He is the One Who causes the day and the night to alternate, ˹as a sign˺ for whoever desires to be mindful or to be grateful
25|63|The ˹true˺ servants of the Most Compassionate are those who walk on the earth humbly, and when the foolish address them ˹improperly˺, they only respond with peace
25|64|˹They are˺ those who spend ˹a good portion of˺ the night, prostrating themselves and standing before their Lord
25|65|˹They are˺ those who pray, “Our Lord! Keep the punishment of Hell away from us, for its punishment is indeed unrelenting
25|66|It is certainly an evil place to settle and reside.”
25|67|˹They are˺ those who spend neither wastefully nor stingily, but moderately in between
25|68|˹They are˺ those who do not invoke any other god besides God, nor take a ˹human˺ life—made sacred by God—except with ˹legal˺ right, nor commit fornication. And whoever does ˹any of˺ this will face the penalty
25|69|Their punishment will be multiplied on the Day of Judgment, and they will remain in it forever, in disgrace
25|70|As for those who repent, believe, and do good deeds, they are the ones whose evil deeds God will change into good deeds. For God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
25|71|And whoever repents and does good has truly turned to God properly
25|72|˹They are˺ those who do not bear false witness, and when they come across falsehood, they pass ˹it˺ by with dignity
25|73|˹They are˺ those who, when reminded of the revelation of their Lord, do not turn a blind eye or a deaf ear to it
25|74|˹They are˺ those who pray, “Our Lord! Bless us with ˹pious˺ spouses and offspring who will be the joy of our hearts, and make us models for the righteous.”
25|75|It is they who will be rewarded with ˹elevated˺ mansions ˹in Paradise˺ for their perseverance, and will be received with salutations and ˹greetings of˺ peace
25|76|staying there forever. What an excellent place to settle and reside
25|77|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “You ˹all˺ would not ˹even˺ matter to my Lord were it not for your faith ˹in Him˺. But now you ˹disbelievers˺ have denied ˹the truth˺, so the torment is bound to come.”
26|1|Ṭâ-Sĩn-Mĩm
26|2|These are the verses of the clear Book
26|3|Perhaps you ˹O Prophet˺ will grieve yourself to death over their disbelief
26|4|If We willed, We could send down upon them a ˹compelling˺ sign from the heavens, leaving their necks bent in ˹utter˺ submission to it
26|5|Whatever new reminder comes to them from the Most Compassionate, they always turn away from it
26|6|They have certainly denied ˹the truth˺, so they will soon face the consequences of their ridicule
26|7|Have they failed to look at the earth, ˹to see˺ how many types of fine plants We have caused to grow in it
26|8|Surely in this is a sign. Yet most of them would not believe
26|9|And your Lord is certainly the Almighty, Most Merciful
26|10|˹Remember˺ when your Lord called out to Moses, “Go to the wrongdoing people—
26|11|the people of Pharaoh. Will they not fear ˹God˺?”
26|12|He replied, “My Lord! I fear that they will reject me
26|13|And ˹so˺ my heart will be broken and my tongue will be tied. So send Aaron along ˹as a messenger˺
26|14|Also, they have a charge against me, so I fear they may kill me.”
26|15|God responded, “Certainly not! So go, both of you, with Our signs. We will be with you, listening
26|16|Go to Pharaoh and say, ‘We are messengers from the Lord of all worlds
26|17|˹commanded to say:˺ ‘Let the Children of Israel go with us.’’”
26|18|Pharaoh protested, “Did we not raise you among us as a child, and you stayed several years of your life in our care
26|19|Then you did what you did, being ˹utterly˺ ungrateful!”
26|20|Moses replied, “I did it then, lacking guidance
26|21|So I fled from you when I feared you. Then my Lord granted me wisdom and made me one of the messengers
26|22|How can that be a ‘favour,’ of which you remind me, when ˹it was only because˺ you ˹have˺ enslaved the Children of Israel?”
26|23|Pharaoh asked, “And what is ‘the Lord of all worlds’?”
26|24|Moses replied, “˹He is˺ the Lord of the heavens and the earth and everything in between, if only you had sure faith.”
26|25|Pharaoh said to those around him, “Did you hear ˹what he said˺?”
26|26|Moses added, “˹He is˺ your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers.”
26|27|Pharaoh said ˹mockingly˺, “Your messenger, who has been sent to you, must be insane.”
26|28|Moses responded: “˹He is˺ the Lord of the east and west, and everything in between, if only you had any sense.”
26|29|Pharaoh threatened, “If you take any other god besides me, I will certainly have you imprisoned.”
26|30|Moses responded, “Even if I bring you a clear proof?”
26|31|Pharaoh demanded, “Bring it then, if what you say is true.”
26|32|So he threw down his staff and—behold!—it became a real snake
26|33|Then he drew his hand ˹out of his collar˺ and it was ˹shining˺ white for all to see
26|34|Pharaoh said to the chiefs around him, “He is indeed a skilled magician
26|35|who seeks to drive you from your land by his magic. So what do you propose?”
26|36|They replied, “Let him and his brother wait and dispatch mobilizers to all cities
26|37|to bring you every skilled magician.”
26|38|So the magicians were assembled at the set time on the appointed day
26|39|And the people were asked, “Will you join the gathering
26|40|so that we may follow the magicians if they prevail?”
26|41|When the magicians came, they asked Pharaoh, “Shall we have a ˹suitable˺ reward if we prevail?”
26|42|He replied, “Yes, and you will then certainly be among those closest to me.”
26|43|Moses said to them, “Cast whatever you wish to cast.”
26|44|So they cast down their ropes and staffs, saying, “By Pharaoh’s might, it is we who will surely prevail.”
26|45|Then Moses threw down his staff, and—behold!—it devoured the objects of their illusion
26|46|So the magicians fell down, prostrating
26|47|They declared, “We ˹now˺ believe in the Lord of all worlds—
26|48|the Lord of Moses and Aaron.”
26|49|Pharaoh threatened, “How dare you believe in him before I give you permission? He must be your master who taught you magic, but soon you will see. I will certainly cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides, then crucify you all.”
26|50|They responded, “˹That would be˺ no harm! Surely to our Lord we will ˹all˺ return
26|51|We really hope that our Lord will forgive our sins, as we are the first to believe.”
26|52|And We inspired Moses, ˹saying,˺ “Leave with My servants at night, for you will surely be pursued.”
26|53|Then Pharaoh sent mobilizers to all cities
26|54|˹and said,˺ “These ˹outcasts˺ are just a handful of people
26|55|who have really enraged us
26|56|but we are all on the alert.”
26|57|So We lured the tyrants out of ˹their˺ gardens, springs
26|58|treasures, and splendid residences
26|59|So it was. And We awarded it ˹all˺ to the Children of Israel
26|60|And so they pursued them at sunrise
26|61|When the two groups came face to face, the companions of Moses cried out, “We are overtaken for sure.”
26|62|Moses reassured ˹them˺, “Absolutely not! My Lord is certainly with me—He will guide me.”
26|63|So We inspired Moses: “Strike the sea with your staff,” and the sea was split, each part was like a huge mountain
26|64|We drew the pursuers to that place
26|65|and delivered Moses and those with him all together
26|66|Then We drowned the others
26|67|Surely in this is a sign. Yet most of them would not believe
26|68|And your Lord is certainly the Almighty, Most Merciful
26|69|Relate to them ˹O Prophet˺ the story of Abraham
26|70|when he questioned his father and his people, “What is that you worship ˹besides God˺?”
26|71|They replied, “We worship idols, to which we are fully devoted.”
26|72|Abraham asked, “Can they hear you when you call upon them
26|73|Or can they benefit or harm you?”
26|74|They replied, “No! But we found our forefathers doing the same.”
26|75|Abraham responded, “Have you ˹really˺ considered what you have been worshipping—
26|76|you and your ancestors
26|77|They are ˹all˺ enemies to me, except the Lord of all worlds
26|78|˹He is˺ the One Who created me, and He ˹alone˺ guides me
26|79|˹He is˺ the One Who provides me with food and drink
26|80|And He ˹alone˺ heals me when I am sick
26|81|And He ˹is the One Who˺ will cause me to die, and then bring me back to life
26|82|And He is ˹the One˺ Who, I hope, will forgive my flaws on Judgment Day.”
26|83|“My Lord! Grant me wisdom, and join me with the righteous
26|84|Bless me with honourable mention among later generations
26|85|Make me one of those awarded the Garden of Bliss
26|86|Forgive my father, for he is certainly one of the misguided
26|87|And do not disgrace me on the Day all will be resurrected—
26|88|the Day when neither wealth nor children will be of any benefit
26|89|Only those who come before God with a pure heart ˹will be saved˺.”
26|90|˹On that Day˺ Paradise will be brought near to the God-fearing
26|91|and the Hellfire will be displayed to the deviant
26|92|And it will be said to them, “Where are those you used to worship
26|93|besides God? Can they help you or even help themselves?”
26|94|Then the idols will be hurled headlong into Hell, along with the deviant
26|95|and the soldiers of Iblîs, all together
26|96|There the deviant will cry while disputing with their idols
26|97|“By God! We were clearly mistaken
26|98|when we made you equal to the Lord of all worlds
26|99|And none led us astray other than the wicked
26|100|Now we have none to intercede for us
26|101|nor a close friend
26|102|If only we could have a second chance, then we would be believers.”
26|103|Surely in this is a sign. Yet most of them would not believe
26|104|And your Lord is certainly the Almighty, Most Merciful
26|105|The people of Noah rejected the messengers
26|106|when their brother Noah said to them, “Will you not fear ˹God˺
26|107|I am truly a trustworthy messenger to you
26|108|So fear God, and obey me
26|109|I do not ask you for any reward for this ˹message˺. My reward is only from the Lord of all worlds
26|110|So fear God, and obey me.”
26|111|They argued, “How can we believe in you, when you are followed ˹only˺ by the lowest of the low?”
26|112|He responded, “And what knowledge do I have of what they do
26|113|Their judgment is with my Lord, if you had any sense
26|114|I am not going to expel the believers
26|115|I am only sent with a clear warning.”
26|116|They threatened, “If you do not desist, O Noah, you will surely be stoned ˹to death˺.”
26|117|Noah prayed, “My Lord! My people have truly rejected me
26|118|So judge between me and them decisively, and save me and the believers with me.”
26|119|So We saved him and those with him in the fully loaded Ark
26|120|Then afterwards We drowned the rest
26|121|Surely in this is a sign. Yet most of them would not believe
26|122|And your Lord is certainly the Almighty, Most Merciful
26|123|The people of ’Âd rejected the messengers
26|124|when their brother Hûd said to them, “Will you not fear ˹God˺
26|125|I am truly a trustworthy messenger to you
26|126|So fear God, and obey me
26|127|I do not ask you for any reward for this ˹message˺. My reward is only from the Lord of all worlds
26|128|˹Why˺ do you build a landmark on every high place in vanity
26|129|and construct castles, as if you are going to live forever
26|130|and act so viciously when you attack ˹others˺
26|131|So fear God, and obey me
26|132|Fear the One Who has provided you with ˹the good˺ things you know
26|133|He provided you with cattle, and children
26|134|and gardens, and springs
26|135|I truly fear for you the torment of a tremendous day.”
26|136|They responded, “It is all the same to us whether you warn ˹us˺ or not
26|137|This is simply the tradition of our predecessors
26|138|And we will never be punished.”
26|139|So they rejected him, and ˹so˺ We destroyed them. Surely in this is a sign. Yet most of them would not believe
26|140|And your Lord is certainly the Almighty, Most Merciful
26|141|The people of Thamûd rejected the messengers
26|142|when their brother Ṣâliḥ said to them, “Will you not fear ˹God˺
26|143|I am truly a trustworthy messenger to you
26|144|So fear God, and obey me
26|145|I do not ask you for any reward for this ˹message˺. My reward is only from the Lord of all worlds
26|146|Do you think you will be ˹forever˺ left secure in what you have here
26|147|amid gardens and springs
26|148|and ˹various˺ crops, and palm trees ˹loaded˺ with tender fruit
26|149|to carve homes in the mountains with great skill
26|150|So fear God, and obey me
26|151|And do not follow the command of the transgressors
26|152|who spread corruption throughout the land, never setting things right.”
26|153|They replied, “You are simply bewitched
26|154|You are only a human being like us, so bring forth a sign if what you say is true.”
26|155|Ṣâliḥ said, “Here is a camel. She will have her turn to drink as you have yours, each on an appointed day
26|156|And do not ever touch her with harm, or you will be overtaken by the torment of a tremendous day.”
26|157|But they killed her, becoming regretful
26|158|So the punishment overtook them. Surely in this is a sign. Yet most of them would not believe
26|159|And your Lord is certainly the Almighty, Most Merciful
26|160|The people of Lot rejected the messengers
26|161|when their brother Lot said to them, “Will you not fear ˹God˺
26|162|I am truly a trustworthy messenger to you
26|163|So fear God, and obey me
26|164|I do not ask you for any reward for this ˹message˺. My reward is only from the Lord of all worlds
26|165|Why do you ˹men˺ lust after fellow men
26|166|leaving the wives that your Lord has created for you? In fact, you are a transgressing people.”
26|167|They threatened, “If you do not desist, O Lot, you will surely be expelled.”
26|168|Lot responded, “I am truly one of those who despise your ˹shameful˺ practice
26|169|My Lord! Save me and my family from ˹the consequences of˺ what they do.”
26|170|So We saved him and all of his family
26|171|except an old woman, who was one of the doomed
26|172|Then We utterly destroyed the rest
26|173|pouring upon them a rain ˹of brimstone˺. How evil was the rain of those who had been warned
26|174|Surely in this is a sign. Yet most of them would not believe
26|175|And your Lord is certainly the Almighty, Most Merciful
26|176|The residents of the Forest rejected the messengers
26|177|when Shu’aib said to them, “Will you not fear ˹God˺
26|178|I am truly a trustworthy messenger to you
26|179|So fear God, and obey me
26|180|I do not ask you for any reward for this ˹message˺. My reward is only from the Lord of all worlds
26|181|Give full measure, and cause no loss ˹to others˺
26|182|Weigh with an even balance
26|183|and do not defraud people of their property. Nor go about spreading corruption in the land
26|184|And fear the One Who created you and ˹all˺ earlier peoples.”
26|185|They replied, “You are simply bewitched
26|186|Also, you are only a human being like us, and we think you are indeed a liar
26|187|So cause ˹deadly˺ pieces of the sky to fall upon us, if what you say is true.”
26|188|Shu’aib responded, “My Lord knows best whatever you do.”
26|189|So they rejected him, and ˹so˺ were overtaken by the torment of the day of the ˹deadly˺ cloud. That was really a torment of a tremendous day
26|190|Surely in this is a sign. Yet most of them would not believe
26|191|And your Lord is certainly the Almighty, Most Merciful
26|192|This is certainly a revelation from the Lord of all worlds
26|193|which the trustworthy spirit ˹Gabriel˺ brought down
26|194|into your heart ˹O Prophet˺—so that you may be one of the warners—
26|195|in a clear Arabic tongue
26|196|And it has indeed been ˹foretold˺ in the Scriptures of those before
26|197|Was it not sufficient proof for the deniers that it has been recognized by the knowledgeable among the Children of Israel
26|198|Had We revealed it to a non-Arab
26|199|who would then recite it to the deniers ˹in fluent Arabic˺, still they would not have believed in it
26|200|This is how We allow denial ˹to steep˺ into the hearts of the wicked
26|201|They will not believe in it until they see the painful punishment
26|202|which will take them by surprise when they least expect ˹it˺
26|203|Then they will cry, “Can we be allowed more time?”
26|204|Do they ˹really˺ seek to hasten Our torment
26|205|Imagine ˹O Prophet˺ if We allowed them enjoyment for years
26|206|then there came to them what they had been threatened with
26|207|would that enjoyment be of any benefit to them ˹at all˺
26|208|We have never destroyed a society without warners
26|209|to remind ˹them˺, for We would never wrong ˹anyone˺
26|210|It was not the devils who brought this ˹Quran˺ down
26|211|it is not for them ˹to do so˺, nor can they
26|212|for they are strictly barred from ˹even˺ overhearing ˹it˺
26|213|So do not ever call upon any other god besides God, or you will be one of the punished
26|214|And warn ˹all, starting with˺ your closest relatives
26|215|and be gracious to the believers who follow you
26|216|But if they disobey you, say, “I am certainly free of what you do.”
26|217|Put your trust in the Almighty, Most Merciful
26|218|Who sees you when you rise ˹for prayer at night˺
26|219|as well as your movements ˹in prayer˺ along with ˹fellow˺ worshippers
26|220|He ˹alone˺ is indeed the All-Hearing, All-Knowing
26|221|Shall I inform you of whom the devils ˹actually˺ descend upon
26|222|They descend upon every sinful liar
26|223|who gives an ˹attentive˺ ear ˹to half-truths˺, mostly passing on sheer lies
26|224|As for poets, they are followed ˹merely˺ by deviants
26|225|Do you not see how they rant in every field
26|226|only saying what they never do
26|227|Except those who believe, do good, remember God often, and ˹poetically˺ avenge ˹the believers˺ after being wrongfully slandered. The wrongdoers will come to know what ˹evil˺ end they will meet
27|1|Ṭâ-Sĩn. These are the verses of the Quran; the clear Book
27|2|˹It is˺ a guide and good news for the believers
27|3|˹those˺ who establish prayer, pay alms-tax, and have sure faith in the Hereafter
27|4|As for those who do not believe in the Hereafter, We have certainly made their ˹evil˺ deeds appealing to them, so they wander blindly
27|5|It is they who will suffer a dreadful torment, and in the Hereafter they will ˹truly˺ be the greatest losers
27|6|And indeed, you ˹O Prophet˺ are receiving the Quran from the One ˹Who is˺ All-Wise, All-Knowing
27|7|˹Remember˺ when Moses said to his family, “I have spotted a fire. I will either bring you some directions from there, or a burning torch so you may warm yourselves.”
27|8|But when he came to it, he was called ˹by God˺, “Blessed is the one at the fire, and whoever is around it! Glory be to God, the Lord of all worlds
27|9|O Moses! It is truly I. I am God—the Almighty, All-Wise
27|10|Now, throw down your staff!” But when he saw it slithering like a snake, he ran away without looking back. ˹God reassured him,˺ “O Moses! Do not be afraid! Messengers should have no fear in My presence
27|11|˹Fear is˺ only for those who do wrong. But if they later mend ˹their˺ evil ˹ways˺ with good, then I am certainly All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
27|12|Now put your hand through ˹the opening of˺ your collar, it will come out ˹shining˺ white, unblemished. ˹These are two˺ of nine signs for Pharaoh and his people. They have truly been a rebellious people.”
27|13|But when Our enlightening signs came to them, they said, “This is pure magic.”
27|14|And, although their hearts were convinced the signs were true, they still denied them wrongfully and arrogantly. See then what was the end of the corruptors
27|15|Indeed, We granted knowledge to David and Solomon. And they said ˹in acknowledgment˺, “All praise is for God Who has privileged us over many of His faithful servants.”
27|16|And David was succeeded by Solomon, who said, “O people! We have been taught the language of birds, and been given everything ˹we need˺. This is indeed a great privilege.”
27|17|Solomon’s forces of jinn, humans, and birds were rallied for him, perfectly organized
27|18|And when they came across a valley of ants, an ant warned, “O ants! Go quickly into your homes so Solomon and his armies do not crush you, unknowingly.”
27|19|So Solomon smiled in amusement at her words, and prayed, “My Lord! Inspire me to ˹always˺ be thankful for Your favours which You have blessed me and my parents with, and to do good deeds that please you. Admit me, by Your mercy, into ˹the company of˺ Your righteous servants.”
27|20|˹One day˺ he inspected the birds, and wondered, “Why is it that I cannot see the hoopoe? Or could he be absent
27|21|I will surely subject him to a severe punishment, or ˹even˺ slaughter him, unless he brings me a compelling excuse.”
27|22|It was not long before the bird came and said, “I have found out something you do not know. I have just come to you from Sheba with sure news
27|23|Indeed, I found a woman ruling over them, who has been given everything ˹she needs˺, and who has a magnificent throne
27|24|I found her and her people prostrating to the sun instead of God. For Satan has made their deeds appealing to them—hindering them from the ˹Right˺ Way and leaving them unguided—
27|25|so they do not prostrate to God, Who brings forth what is hidden in the heavens and the earth, and knows what you ˹all˺ conceal and what you reveal
27|26|˹He is˺ God! There is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him, the Lord of the Mighty Throne.”
27|27|Solomon said, “We will see whether you are telling the truth or lying
27|28|Go with this letter of mine and deliver it to them, then stand aside and see how they will respond.”
27|29|The Queen ˹later˺ announced, “O chiefs! Indeed, a noble letter has been delivered to me
27|30|It is from Solomon, and it reads: ‘In the Name of God—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful
27|31|Do not be arrogant with me, but come to me, fully submitting ˹to God˺.’”
27|32|She said, “O chiefs! Advise me in this matter of mine, for I would never make any decision without you.”
27|33|They responded, “We are a people of strength and great ˹military˺ might, but the decision is yours, so decide what you will command.”
27|34|She reasoned, “Indeed, when kings invade a land, they ruin it and debase its nobles. They really do so
27|35|But I will certainly send him a gift, and see what ˹response˺ my envoys will return with.”
27|36|When the chief-envoy came to him, Solomon said, “Do you offer me wealth? What God has granted me is far greater than what He has granted you. No! It is you who rejoice in ˹receiving˺ gifts
27|37|Go back to them, for we will certainly mobilize against them forces which they can never resist, and we will drive them out from there in disgrace, fully humbled.”
27|38|Solomon asked, “O chiefs! Which of you can bring me her throne before they come to me in ˹full˺ submission?”
27|39|One mighty jinn responded, “I can bring it to you before you rise from this council of yours. And I am quite strong and trustworthy for this ˹task˺.”
27|40|But the one who had knowledge of the Scripture said, “I can bring it to you in the blink of an eye.” So when Solomon saw it placed before him, he exclaimed, “This is by the grace of my Lord to test me whether I am grateful or ungrateful. And whoever is grateful, it is only for their own good. But whoever is ungrateful, surely my Lord is Self-Sufficient, Most Generous.”
27|41|˹Then˺ Solomon said, “Disguise her throne for her so we may see whether she will recognize ˹it˺ or she will not be able to.”
27|42|So when she arrived, it was said ˹to her˺, “Is your throne like this?” She replied, “It looks to be the same. We have ˹already˺ received knowledge ˹of Solomon’s prophethood˺ before this ˹miracle˺, and have submitted ˹to God˺.”
27|43|But she had been hindered by what she used to worship instead of God, for she was indeed from a disbelieving people
27|44|Then she was told, “Enter the palace.” But when she saw the hall, she thought it was a body of water, so she bared her legs. Solomon said. “It is just a palace paved with crystal.” ˹At last˺ she declared, “My Lord! I have certainly wronged my soul. Now I ˹fully˺ submit myself along with Solomon to God, the Lord of all worlds.”
27|45|And We certainly sent to the people of Thamûd their brother Ṣâliḥ, proclaiming, “Worship God,” but they suddenly split into two opposing groups
27|46|He urged ˹the disbelieving group˺, “O my people! Why do you ˹seek to˺ hasten the torment rather than grace? If only you sought God’s forgiveness so you may be shown mercy!”
27|47|They replied, “You and your followers are a bad omen for us.” He responded, “Your omens are destined by God. In fact, you are ˹only˺ a people being tested.”
27|48|And there were in the city nine ˹elite˺ men who spread corruption in the land, never doing what is right
27|49|They vowed, “Let us swear by God that we will take him and his family down by night. Then we will certainly say to his ˹closest˺ heirs, ‘We did not witness the murder of his family. We are definitely telling the truth.’”
27|50|And ˹so˺ they made a plan, but We too made a plan, while they were unaware
27|51|See then what the consequences of their plan were: We ˹utterly˺ destroyed them and their people all together
27|52|So their homes are there, ˹but completely˺ ruined because of their wrongdoing. Surely in this is a lesson for people of knowledge
27|53|And We delivered those who were faithful and were mindful ˹of God˺
27|54|And ˹remember˺ Lot, when he rebuked ˹the men of˺ his people, “Do you commit that shameful deed while you can see ˹one another˺
27|55|Do you really lust after men instead of women? In fact, you are ˹only˺ a people acting ignorantly.”
27|56|But his people’s only response was to say, “Expel Lot’s followers from your land! They are a people who wish to remain chaste!”
27|57|So We delivered him and his family, except his wife. We had destined her to be one of the doomed
27|58|And We poured upon them a rain ˹of brimstone˺. How evil was the rain of those who had been warned
27|59|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Praise be to God, and peace be upon the servants He has chosen.” ˹Ask the disbelievers,˺ “Which is better: God or whatever ˹gods˺ they associate ˹with Him˺?”
27|60|Or ˹ask them,˺ “Who created the heavens and the earth, and sends down rain for you from the sky, by which We cause delightful gardens to grow? You could never cause their trees to grow. Was it another god besides God?” Absolutely not! But they are a people who set up equals ˹to God˺
27|61|Or ˹ask them,˺ “Who made the earth a place of settlement, caused rivers to flow through it, placed firm mountains upon it, and set a barrier between ˹fresh and salt˺ bodies of water? Was it another god besides God?” Absolutely not! But most of them do not know
27|62|Or ˹ask them,˺ “Who responds to the distressed when they cry to Him, relieving ˹their˺ affliction, and ˹Who˺ makes you successors in the earth? Is it another god besides God? Yet you are hardly mindful!”
27|63|Or ˹ask them,˺ “Who guides you in the darkness of the land and sea, and sends the winds ushering in His mercy? Is it another god besides God? Exalted is God above what they associate ˹with Him˺
27|64|Or ˹ask them,˺ “Who originates the creation then resurrects it, and gives you provisions from the heavens and the earth? Is it another god besides God?” Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Show ˹me˺ your proof, if what you say is true.”
27|65|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “None in the heavens and the earth has knowledge of the unseen except God. Nor do they know when they will be resurrected
27|66|No! Their knowledge of the Hereafter amounts to ignorance. In fact, they are in doubt about it. In truth, they are ˹totally˺ blind to it
27|67|The disbelievers ask, “When we and our fathers are reduced to dust, will we really be brought forth ˹alive˺
27|68|We have already been promised this, as well as our forefathers earlier. This is nothing but ancient fables!”
27|69|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Travel throughout the land and see the fate of the wicked.”
27|70|Do not grieve for them, nor be distressed by their schemes
27|71|They ask ˹the believers˺, “When will this threat come to pass, if what you say is true?”
27|72|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Perhaps some of what you seek to hasten is close at hand.”
27|73|Surely your Lord is ever Bountiful to humanity, but most of them are ungrateful
27|74|And surely your Lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they reveal
27|75|For there is nothing hidden in the heavens or the earth without being ˹written˺ in a perfect Record
27|76|Indeed, this Quran clarifies for the Children of Israel most of what they differ over
27|77|And it is truly a guide and mercy for the believers
27|78|Your Lord will certainly judge between them by His justice, for He is the Almighty, All-Knowing
27|79|So put your trust in God, for you are surely upon the ˹Path of˺ clear truth
27|80|You certainly cannot make the dead hear ˹the truth˺. Nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn their backs and walk away
27|81|Nor can you lead the blind out of their misguidance. You can make none hear ˹the truth˺ except those who believe in Our revelations, ˹fully˺ submitting ˹to God˺
27|82|And when the decree ˹of the Hour˺ comes to pass against them, We will bring forth for them a beast from the earth, telling them that the people had no sure faith in Our revelations
27|83|˹Watch for˺ the Day We will gather from every faith-community a group of those who denied Our revelations, and they will be driven in ranks
27|84|When they ˹finally˺ come before their Lord, He will ask ˹them˺, “Did you deny My revelations without ˹even˺ comprehending them? Or what ˹exactly˺ did you do?”
27|85|And the decree ˹of torment˺ will be justified against them for their wrongdoing, leaving them speechless
27|86|Do they not see that We made the night for them to rest in and the day bright? Surely in this are signs for those who believe
27|87|And ˹beware of˺ the Day the Trumpet will be blown, and all those in the heavens and all those on the earth will be horrified ˹to the point of death˺, except those God wills ˹to spare˺. And all will come before Him, fully humbled
27|88|Now you see the mountains, thinking they are firmly fixed, but they are travelling ˹just˺ like clouds. ˹That is˺ the design of God, Who has perfected everything. Surely He is All-Aware of what you do
27|89|Whoever comes with a good deed will be rewarded with what is better, and they will be secure from the horror on that Day
27|90|And whoever comes with an evil deed will be hurled face-first into the Fire. Are you rewarded except for what you used to do
27|91|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “I have only been commanded to worship the Lord of this city ˹of Mecca˺, Who has made it sacred, and to Him belongs everything. And I am commanded to be one of those who ˹fully˺ submit ˹to Him˺
27|92|and to recite the Quran.” Then whoever chooses to be guided, it is only for their own good. But whoever chooses to stray, say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “I am only a warner.”
27|93|And say, “All praise is for God! He will show you His signs, and you will recognize them. And your Lord is never unaware of what you do.”
28|1|Ṭâ-Sĩn-Mĩm
28|2|These are the verses of the clear Book
28|3|We narrate to you ˹O Prophet˺ part of the story of Moses and Pharaoh in truth for people who believe
28|4|Indeed, Pharaoh ˹arrogantly˺ elevated himself in the land and divided its people into ˹subservient˺ groups, one of which he persecuted, slaughtering their sons and keeping their women. He was truly one of the corruptors
28|5|But it was Our Will to favour those who were oppressed in the land, making them models ˹of faith˺ as well as successors
28|6|and to establish them in the land; and through them show Pharaoh, Hamân, and their soldiers ˹the fulfilment of˺ what they feared
28|7|We inspired the mother of Moses: “Nurse him, but when you fear for him, put him then into the river, and do not fear or grieve. We will certainly return him to you, and make him one of the messengers.”
28|8|And ˹it so happened that˺ Pharaoh’s people picked him up, only to become their enemy and source of grief. Surely Pharaoh, Hamân, and their soldiers were sinful
28|9|Pharaoh’s wife said ˹to him˺, “˹This baby is˺ a source of joy for me and you. Do not kill him. Perhaps he may be useful to us or we may adopt him as a son.” They were unaware ˹of what was to come˺
28|10|And the heart of Moses’ mother ached so much that she almost gave away his identity, had We not reassured her heart in order for her to have faith ˹in God’s promise˺
28|11|And she said to his sister, “Keep track of him!” So she watched him from a distance, while they were unaware
28|12|And We had caused him to refuse all wet-nurses at first, so his sister suggested, “Shall I direct you to a family who will bring him up for you and take good care of him?”
28|13|This is how We returned him to his mother so that her heart would be put at ease, and not grieve, and that she would know that God’s promise is ˹always˺ true. But most people do not know
28|14|And when he reached full strength and maturity, We gave him wisdom and knowledge. This is how We reward the good-doers
28|15|˹One day˺ he entered the city unnoticed by its people. There he found two men fighting: one of his own people, and the other of his enemies. The man from his people called to him for help against his foe. So Moses punched him, causing his death. Moses cried, “This is from Satan’s handiwork. He is certainly a sworn, misleading enemy.”
28|16|He pleaded, “My Lord! I have definitely wronged my soul, so forgive me.” So He forgave him, ˹for˺ He is indeed the All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
28|17|Moses pledged, “My Lord! For all Your favours upon me, I will never side with the wicked.”
28|18|And so Moses became fearful, watching out in the city, when suddenly the one who sought his help the day before cried out to him again for help. Moses rebuked him, “Indeed, you are clearly a trouble-maker.”
28|19|Then when Moses was about to lay his hands on their foe, the enemy said, “O Moses! Do you intend to kill me as you killed a man yesterday? You only want to be a tyrant in the land. You do not intend to make peace!”
28|20|And there came a man, rushing from the farthest end of the city. He said, “O Moses! The chiefs are actually conspiring against you to put you to death, so leave ˹the city˺. I really advise you ˹to do so˺.”
28|21|So Moses left the city in a state of fear and caution, praying, “My Lord! Deliver me from the wrongdoing people.”
28|22|And as he made his way towards Midian, he said, “I trust my Lord will guide me to the right way.”
28|23|When he arrived at the well of Midian, he found a group of people watering ˹their herds˺. Apart from them, he noticed two women holding back ˹their herd˺. He asked ˹them˺, “What is the problem?” They replied, “We cannot water ˹our animals˺ until the ˹other˺ shepherds are done, for our father is a very old man.”
28|24|So he watered ˹their herd˺ for them, then withdrew to the shade and prayed, “My Lord! I am truly in ˹desperate˺ need of whatever provision You may have in store for me.”
28|25|Then one of the two women came to him, walking bashfully. She said, “My father is inviting you so he may reward you for watering ˹our animals˺ for us.” When Moses came to him and told him his whole story, the old man said, “Have no fear! You are ˹now˺ safe from the wrongdoing people.”
28|26|One of the two daughters suggested, “O my dear father! Hire him. The best man for employment is definitely the strong and trustworthy ˹one˺.”
28|27|The old man proposed, “I wish to marry one of these two daughters of mine to you, provided that you stay in my service for eight years. If you complete ten, it will be ˹a favour˺ from you, but I do not wish to make it difficult for you. God willing, you will find me an agreeable man.”
28|28|Moses responded, “˹Then˺ it is ˹settled˺ between you and I. Whichever term I fulfill, there will be no ˹further˺ obligation on me. And God is a Witness to what we say.”
28|29|When Moses had completed the term and was travelling with his family, he spotted a fire on the side of Mount Ṭûr. He said to his family, “Stay here, ˹for˺ I have spotted a fire. Perhaps from there I can bring you some directions or a torch from the fire so you may warm yourselves.”
28|30|But when he came to it, he was called from the bush in the sacred ground to the right side of the valley: “O Moses! It is truly I. I am God—the Lord of all worlds
28|31|Now, throw down your staff!” But when he saw it slithering like a snake, he ran away without looking back. ˹God reassured him,˺ “O Moses! Draw near, and have no fear. You are perfectly secure
28|32|Now put your hand through ˹the opening of˺ your collar, it will come out ˹shining˺ white, unblemished. And cross your arms tightly to calm your fears. These are two proofs from your Lord to Pharaoh and his chiefs. They have truly been a rebellious people.”
28|33|Moses appealed, “My Lord! I have indeed killed a man from them, so I fear they may kill me
28|34|And my brother Aaron is more eloquent than I, so send him with me as a helper to support what I say, for I truly fear they may reject me.”
28|35|God responded, “We will assist you with your brother and grant you both authority, so they cannot harm you. With Our signs, you and those who follow you will ˹certainly˺ prevail.”
28|36|But when Moses came to them with Our clear signs, they said ˹arrogantly˺, “This is nothing but conjured magic ˹tricks˺. We have never heard of this in ˹the history of˺ our forefathers.”
28|37|Moses responded, “My Lord knows best who has come with ˹true˺ guidance from Him and will fare best in the end. Indeed, the wrongdoers will never succeed.”
28|38|Pharaoh declared, “O chiefs! I know of no other god for you but myself. So bake bricks out of clay for me, O Hamân, and build a high tower so I may look at the God of Moses, although I am sure he is a liar.”
28|39|And so he and his soldiers behaved arrogantly in the land with no right, thinking they would never be returned to Us
28|40|So We seized him and his soldiers, casting them into the sea. See then what was the end of the wrongdoers
28|41|We made them leaders inviting ˹others˺ to the Fire. And on the Day of Judgment they will not be helped
28|42|We caused a curse to follow them in this world. And on the Day of Judgment they will be among the outcasts
28|43|Indeed, We gave Moses the Scripture—after destroying earlier nations—as an insight for the people, a guide, and mercy so perhaps they would be mindful
28|44|You were not there ˹O Prophet˺ on the western side of the mountain when We entrusted the Commandments to Moses, nor were you present ˹in his time˺
28|45|But We ˹later˺ raised ˹several˺ generations, and the ages took their toll on them. Nor were you living among the people of Midian, rehearsing Our revelations with them. But it is We Who have sent ˹this revelation to you˺
28|46|And you were not at the side of Mount Ṭûr when We called out ˹to Moses˺. But ˹you have been sent˺ as a mercy from your Lord to warn a people to whom no warner has come before you, so perhaps they may be mindful
28|47|Also so they would not say, if struck by an affliction for what their hands have done: “Our Lord! If only You had sent us a messenger, we would have followed Your revelations and become believers.”
28|48|But when the truth came to them from Us, they said, “If only he was given the like of what Moses had been given.” Did they not deny what had been given to Moses earlier? They claimed, “Both ˹Scriptures˺ are works of magic, supporting each other!” Adding, “We truly deny both.”
28|49|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Bring then a scripture from God which is a better guide than these two so I may follow it, if your claim is true.”
28|50|So if they fail to respond to you, then know that they only follow their desires. And who could be more astray than those who follow their desires with no guidance from God? Surely God does not guide the wrongdoing people
28|51|Indeed, We have steadily delivered the Word ˹of God˺ to the people so they may be mindful
28|52|˹As for˺ those ˹faithful˺ to whom We had given the Scripture before this ˹Quran˺, they do believe in it
28|53|When it is recited to them, they declare, “We believe in it. This is definitely the truth from our Lord. We had already submitted ˹even˺ before this.”
28|54|These ˹believers˺ will be given a double reward for their perseverance, responding to evil with good, and for donating from what We have provided for them
28|55|When they hear slanderous talk, they turn away from it, saying, “We are accountable for our deeds and you for yours. Peace ˹is our only response˺ to you! We want nothing to do with those who act ignorantly.”
28|56|You surely cannot guide whoever you like ˹O Prophet˺, but it is God Who guides whoever He wills, and He knows best who are ˹fit to be˺ guided
28|57|They say ˹to the Prophet˺, “If we were to follow ˹true˺ guidance with you, we would certainly be snatched away from our land.” Have We not established for them a safe haven ˹in Mecca˺ to which fruits of all kinds are brought as a provision from Us? But most of them do not know ˹this favour˺
28|58|˹Imagine˺ how many societies We have destroyed that had been spoiled by their ˹comfortable˺ living! Those are their residences, never inhabited after them except passingly. And We ˹alone˺ were the Successor
28|59|Your Lord would never destroy a society until He had sent to its capital a messenger, reciting Our revelations to them. Nor would We ever destroy a society unless its people persisted in wrongdoing
28|60|Whatever ˹pleasure˺ you have been given is no more than ˹a fleeting˺ enjoyment and adornment of this worldly life. But what is with God is far better and more lasting. Will you not then understand
28|61|Can those to whom We have made a fine promise—which they will see fulfilled—be like those who We have allowed to enjoy the pleasures of this worldly life, but on the Day of Judgment will be brought ˹for punishment˺
28|62|˹Watch for˺ the Day He will call to them, “Where are those you claimed were My associate-gods?”
28|63|Those ˹misleaders˺ against whom the decree ˹of torment˺ is justified will cry, “Our Lord! These ˹followers˺ are the ones we caused to deviate. We led them into deviance, for we ourselves were deviant. We disassociate ourselves ˹from them˺ before You. It was not us that they used to worship.”
28|64|It will be said ˹to the disbelievers˺, “Call upon your associate-gods ˹for help˺.” So they will call them, but will receive no response. And they will face the punishment, wishing they had been ˹rightly˺ guided
28|65|And ˹watch for˺ the Day He will call to them, asking, “What response did you give to the messengers?”
28|66|They will be too dumbstruck on that Day to ask one another ˹for answers˺
28|67|As for those who repent, believe, and do good ˹in this world˺, it is right to hope that they will be among the successful
28|68|Your Lord creates and chooses whatever He wills—the choice is not theirs. Glorified and Exalted is God above what they associate ˹with Him˺
28|69|And your Lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they reveal
28|70|He is God. There is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him. All praise belongs to Him in this life and the next. All authority is His. And to Him you will ˹all˺ be returned
28|71|Ask ˹them, O Prophet˺, “Imagine if God were to make the night perpetual for you until the Day of Judgment, which god other than God could bring you sunlight? Will you not then listen?”
28|72|Ask ˹them also˺, “Imagine if God were to make the day perpetual for you until the Day of Judgment, which god other than God could bring you night to rest in? Will you not then see?”
28|73|It is out of His mercy that He has made for you the day and night so that you may rest ˹in the latter˺ and seek His bounty ˹in the former˺, and perhaps you will be grateful
28|74|And ˹watch for˺ the Day He will call to them, “Where are those you claimed were My associate-gods?”
28|75|And We will bring forth a witness from every faith-community and ask ˹the polytheists˺, “Show ˹Us˺ your proof.” Then they will ˹come to˺ know that the truth is with God ˹alone˺. And whatever ˹gods˺ they fabricated will fail them
28|76|Indeed, Korah was from the people of Moses, but he behaved arrogantly towards them. We had granted him such treasures that even their keys would burden a group of strong men. ˹Some of˺ his people advised him, “Do not be prideful! Surely God does not like the prideful
28|77|Rather, seek the ˹reward˺ of the Hereafter by means of what God has granted you, without forgetting your share of this world. And be good ˹to others˺ as God has been good to you. Do not seek to spread corruption in the land, for God certainly does not like the corruptors.”
28|78|He replied, “I have been granted all this because of some knowledge I have.” Did he not know that God had already destroyed some from the generations before him who were far superior to him in power and greater in accumulating ˹wealth˺? There will be no need for the wicked to be asked about their sins
28|79|Then he came out before his people in all his glamour. Those who desired the life of this world wished, “If only we could have something like what Korah has been given. He is truly a man of great fortune!”
28|80|But those gifted with knowledge said, “Shame on you! God’s reward is far better for those who believe and do good. But none will attain this except the steadfast.”
28|81|Then We caused the earth to swallow him up, along with his home. There was no one to help him against God, nor could he even help himself
28|82|And those who had craved his position the previous day began to say, “Ah! It is certainly God Who gives abundant or limited provisions to whoever He wills of His servants. Had it not been for the grace of God, He could have surely caused the earth to swallow us up! Oh, indeed! The disbelievers will never succeed.”
28|83|That ˹eternal˺ Home in the Hereafter We reserve ˹only˺ for those who seek neither tyranny nor corruption on the earth. The ultimate outcome belongs ˹only˺ to the righteous
28|84|Whoever comes with a good deed will be rewarded with what is better. And whoever comes with an evil deed, then the evildoers will only be rewarded for what they used to do
28|85|Most certainly, the One Who has ordained the Quran for you will ˹ultimately˺ bring you back home ˹to Mecca˺. Say, “My Lord knows best who has come with ˹true˺ guidance and who is clearly astray.”
28|86|You never expected this Book to be revealed to you, but ˹it came˺ only ˹as˺ a mercy from your Lord. So never side with the disbelievers ˹in their disbelief˺
28|87|Do not let them turn you away from the revelations of God after they have been sent down to you. Rather, invite ˹all˺ to ˹the Way of˺ your Lord, and never be one of the polytheists
28|88|And do not invoke any other god with God. There is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him. Everything is bound to perish except He Himself. All authority belongs to Him. And to Him you will ˹all˺ be returned
29|1|Alif-Lãm-Mĩm
29|2|Do people think once they say, “We believe,” that they will be left without being put to the test
29|3|We certainly tested those before them. And ˹in this way˺ God will clearly distinguish between those who are truthful and those who are liars
29|4|Or do the evildoers ˹simply˺ think that they will escape Us? How wrong is their judgment
29|5|Whoever hopes for the meeting with God, ˹let them know that˺ God’s appointed time is sure to come. He is the All-Hearing, All-Knowing
29|6|And whoever strives ˹in God’s cause˺, only does so for their own good. Surely God is not in need of ˹any of˺ His creation
29|7|As for those who believe and do good, We will certainly absolve them of their sins, and reward them according to the best of what they used to do
29|8|We have commanded people to honour their parents. But if they urge you to associate with Me what you have no knowledge of, then do not obey them. To Me you will ˹all˺ return, and then I will inform you of what you used to do
29|9|Those who believe and do good will surely be admitted by Us into ˹the company of˺ the righteous
29|10|There are some who say, “We believe in God,” but when they suffer in the cause of God, they mistake ˹this˺ persecution at the hands of people for the punishment of God. But when victory comes from your Lord, they surely say ˹to the believers˺, “We have always been with you.” Does God not know best what is in the hearts of all beings
29|11|God will certainly distinguish between those who have ˹sure˺ faith and the hypocrites
29|12|The disbelievers say to the believers, “˹Just˺ follow our way, and we will bear ˹the burden of˺ your sins.” But they would never ˹want to˺ bear any of the believers’ sins. They are simply lying
29|13|Yet they will certainly ˹be made to˺ carry their own burdens, as well as other burdens along with their own. And they will surely be questioned on Judgment Day about what they used to fabricate
29|14|Indeed, We sent Noah to his people, and he remained among them for a thousand years, less fifty. Then the Flood overtook them, while they persisted in wrongdoing
29|15|But We delivered him and those in the Ark, making it a sign for all people
29|16|And ˹remember˺ when Abraham said to his people, “Worship God, and fear Him. This is better for you, if only you knew
29|17|You worship besides God nothing but idols, simply creating lies ˹about them˺. Those you worship besides God certainly cannot give you any provision. So seek provision from God ˹alone˺, worship Him, and be grateful to Him. To Him you will ˹all˺ be returned
29|18|If you ˹Meccans˺ persist in denial, so did ˹many˺ communities before you. The Messenger’s duty is only to deliver ˹the message˺ clearly.”
29|19|Have they not seen how God originates the creation then resurrects it? That is certainly easy for God
29|20|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Travel throughout the land and see how He originated the creation, then God will bring it into being one more time. Surely God is Most Capable of everything
29|21|He punishes whoever He wills, and shows mercy to whoever He wills. And you will ˹all˺ be returned to Him
29|22|And you cannot escape Him on earth or in heaven. Nor have you any protector or helper besides God.”
29|23|As for those who disbelieve in God’s signs and the meeting with Him, it is they who will have no hope in His mercy. And it is they who will suffer a painful punishment
29|24|But the only response of Abraham’s people was to say: “Kill him or burn him!” But God saved him from the fire. Surely in this are signs for people who believe
29|25|He said ˹to his people˺, “You have taken idols ˹for worship˺ instead of God, only to keep ˹the bond of˺ harmony among yourselves in this worldly life. But on the Day of Judgment you will disown and curse one another. Your home will be the Fire, and you will have no helper!”
29|26|So Lot believed in him. And Abraham said, “I am emigrating ˹in obedience˺ to my Lord. He ˹alone˺ is indeed the Almighty, All-Wise.”
29|27|We blessed him with Isaac and ˹later˺ Jacob, and reserved prophethood and revelation for his descendants. We gave him his reward in this life, and in the Hereafter he will certainly be among the righteous
29|28|And ˹remember˺ when Lot rebuked ˹the men of˺ his people: “You certainly commit a shameful deed that no man has ever done before you
29|29|Do you really lust after ˹other˺ men, abuse the travellers, and practice immorality ˹openly˺ in your gatherings?” His people’s only response was to say ˹mockingly˺: “Bring God’s punishment upon us, if what you say is true.”
29|30|Lot prayed, “My Lord! Help me against the people of corruption.”
29|31|When Our messenger-angels came to Abraham with the good news ˹of the birth of Isaac˺, they said, “We are going to destroy the people of this city ˹of Sodom˺, for its people have persisted in wrongdoing.”
29|32|He said, “But Lot is there!” They responded, “We know best who is there. We will certainly save him and his family—except his wife, who is one of the doomed.”
29|33|And when Our messenger-angels came to Lot, he was distressed and worried by their arrival. They reassured ˹him˺, “Do not fear, nor grieve. We will surely deliver you and your family—except your wife, who is one of the doomed
29|34|We are certainly bringing down a punishment from heaven upon the people of this city for their rebelliousness.”
29|35|And We did leave ˹some of˺ its ruins as a clear lesson for people of understanding
29|36|And to the people of Midian ˹We sent˺ their brother Shu’aib. He said, “O my people! Worship God, and hope for ˹the reward of˺ the Last Day. And do not go about spreading corruption in the land.”
29|37|But they rejected him, so an ˹overwhelming˺ earthquake struck them and they fell lifeless in their homes
29|38|And the people of ’Ȃd and Thamûd ˹met a similar fate˺, which must be clear to you ˹Meccans˺ from their ruins. Satan made their ˹evil˺ deeds appealing to them, hindering them from the ˹Right˺ Way, although they were capable of reasoning
29|39|˹We˺ also ˹destroyed˺ Korah, Pharaoh, and Hamân. Indeed, Moses had come to them with clear proofs, but they behaved arrogantly in the land. Yet they could not escape ˹Us˺
29|40|So We seized each ˹people˺ for their sin: against some of them We sent a storm of stones, some were overtaken by a ˹mighty˺ blast, some We caused the earth to swallow, and some We drowned. God would not have wronged them, but it was they who wronged themselves
29|41|The parable of those who take protectors other than God is that of a spider spinning a shelter. And the flimsiest of all shelters is certainly that of a spider, if only they knew
29|42|God surely knows that whatever ˹gods˺ they invoke besides Him are ˹simply˺ nothing. For He is the Almighty, All-Wise
29|43|These are the parables We set forth for humanity, but none will understand them except the people of knowledge
29|44|God created the heavens and the earth for a purpose. Surely in this is a sign for the people of faith
29|45|Recite what has been revealed to you of the Book and establish prayer. Indeed, ˹genuine˺ prayer should deter ˹one˺ from indecency and wickedness. The remembrance of God is ˹an˺ even greater ˹deterrent˺. And God ˹fully˺ knows what you ˹all˺ do
29|46|Do not argue with the People of the Book unless gracefully, except with those of them who act wrongfully. And say, “We believe in what has been revealed to us and what was revealed to you. Our God and your God is ˹only˺ One. And to Him we ˹fully˺ submit.”
29|47|Similarly ˹to earlier messengers˺, We have revealed to you a Book ˹O Prophet˺. ˹The faithful of˺ those to whom We gave the Scriptures believe in it, as do some of these ˹pagan Arabs˺. And none denies Our revelations except the ˹stubborn˺ disbelievers
29|48|You ˹O Prophet˺ could not read any writing ˹even˺ before this ˹revelation˺, nor could you write at all. Otherwise, the people of falsehood would have been suspicious
29|49|But this ˹Quran˺ is ˹a set of˺ clear revelations ˹preserved˺ in the hearts of those gifted with knowledge. And none denies Our revelations except the ˹stubborn˺ wrongdoers
29|50|They say, “If only ˹some˺ signs had been sent down to him from his Lord!” Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Signs are only with God. And I am only sent with a clear warning.”
29|51|Is it not enough for them that We have sent down to you the Book, ˹which is˺ recited to them. Surely in this ˹Quran˺ is a mercy and reminder for people who believe
29|52|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Sufficient is God as a Witness between me and you. He ˹fully˺ knows whatever is in the heavens and the earth. And those who believe in falsehood and disbelieve in God, it is they who are the ˹true˺ losers.”
29|53|They challenge you ˹O Prophet˺ to hasten the punishment. Had it not been for a time already set, the punishment would have certainly come to them ˹at once˺. But it will definitely take them by surprise when they least expect it
29|54|They urge you to hasten the punishment. And Hell will certainly encompass the disbelievers
29|55|on the Day the punishment will overwhelm them from above them and from below their feet. And it will be said, “Reap what you sowed.”
29|56|O My believing servants! My earth is truly spacious, so worship Me ˹alone˺
29|57|Every soul will taste death, then to Us you will ˹all˺ be returned
29|58|˹As for˺ those who believe and do good, We will certainly house them in ˹elevated˺ mansions in Paradise, under which rivers flow, to stay there forever. How excellent is the reward for those who work ˹righteousness!˺—
29|59|those who patiently endure, and put their trust in their Lord
29|60|How many are the creatures that cannot secure their provisions! ˹It is˺ God ˹Who˺ provides for them and you ˹as well˺. He is indeed the All-Hearing, All-Knowing
29|61|If you ask them ˹O Prophet˺ who created the heavens and the earth and subjected the sun and the moon ˹for your benefit˺, they will certainly say, “God!” How can they then be deluded ˹from the truth˺
29|62|God gives abundant or limited provisions to whoever He wills of His servants. Surely God has ˹full˺ knowledge of everything
29|63|And if you ask them who sends down rain from the sky, giving life to the earth after its death, they will surely say, “God!” Say, “Praise be to God!” In fact, most of them do not understand
29|64|This worldly life is no more than play and amusement. But the Hereafter is indeed the real life, if only they knew
29|65|If they happen to be aboard a ship ˹caught in a storm˺, they cry out to God ˹alone˺ in sincere devotion. But as soon as He delivers them ˹safely˺ to shore, they associate ˹others with Him once again˺
29|66|So let them be ungrateful for all We have given them, and ˹let them˺ enjoy themselves ˹for now˺! For they will soon know
29|67|Have they not seen how We have made ˹Mecca˺ a safe haven, whereas people ˹all˺ around them are snatched away? How can they then believe in falsehood and deny God’s favours
29|68|And who does more wrong than those who fabricate lies against God or reject the truth after it has reached them? Is Hell not a ˹fitting˺ home for the disbelievers
29|69|As for those who struggle in Our cause, We will surely guide them along Our Way. And God is certainly with the good-doers
30|1|Alif-Lãm-Mĩm
30|2|The Romans have been defeated
30|3|in a nearby land. Yet following their defeat, they will triumph
30|4|within three to nine years. The ˹whole˺ matter rests with God before and after ˹victory˺. And on that day the believers will rejoice
30|5|at the victory willed by God. He gives victory to whoever He wills. For He is the Almighty, Most Merciful
30|6|˹This is˺ the promise of God. ˹And˺ God never fails in His promise. But most people do not know
30|7|They ˹only˺ know the worldly affairs of this life, but are ˹totally˺ oblivious to the Hereafter
30|8|Have they not reflected upon their own being? God only created the heavens and the earth and everything in between for a purpose and an appointed term. Yet most people are truly in denial of the meeting with their Lord
30|9|Have they not travelled throughout the land to see what was the end of those ˹destroyed˺ before them? They were far superior in might; they cultivated the land and developed it more than these ˹Meccans˺ ever have. Their messengers came to them with clear proofs. God would have never wronged them, but it was they who wronged themselves
30|10|Then most evil was the end of the evildoers for denying and mocking the signs of God
30|11|It is God Who originates the creation, and will resurrect it. And then to Him you will ˹all˺ be returned
30|12|On the Day the Hour will arrive, the wicked will be dumbstruck
30|13|There will be no intercessors for them from among their associate-gods, and they will ˹totally˺ deny their associate-gods
30|14|And on the Day the Hour will arrive, the people will then be split ˹into two groups˺
30|15|As for those who believed and did good, they will be rejoicing in a Garden
30|16|And as for those who disbelieved, and denied Our signs and the meeting ˹with God˺ in the Hereafter, they will be confined in punishment
30|17|So glorify God in the evening and in the morning—
30|18|all praise is for Him in the heavens and the earth—as well as in the afternoon, and at noon
30|19|He brings forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living. And He gives life to the earth after its death. And so will you be brought forth ˹from the grave˺
30|20|One of His signs is that He created you from dust, then—behold!—you are human beings spreading over ˹the earth˺
30|21|And one of His signs is that He created for you spouses from among yourselves so that you may find comfort in them. And He has placed between you compassion and mercy. Surely in this are signs for people who reflect
30|22|And one of His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the diversity of your languages and colours. Surely in this are signs for those of ˹sound˺ knowledge
30|23|And one of His signs is your sleep by night and by day ˹for rest˺ as well as your seeking His bounty ˹in both˺. Surely in this are signs for people who listen
30|24|And one of His signs is that He shows you lightning, inspiring ˹you with˺ hope and fear. And He sends down rain from the sky, reviving the earth after its death. Surely in this are signs for people who understand
30|25|And one of His signs is that the heavens and the earth persist by His command. Then when He calls you out of the earth just once, you will instantly come forth
30|26|And to Him belong all those in the heavens and the earth—all are subject to His Will
30|27|And He is the One Who originates the creation then will resurrect it—which is even easier for Him. To Him belong the finest attributes in the heavens and the earth. And He is the Almighty, All-Wise
30|28|He sets forth for you an example ˹drawn˺ from your own lives: would you allow some of those ˹bondspeople˺ in your possession to be your equal partners in whatever ˹wealth˺ We have provided you, keeping them in mind as you are mindful of your peers? This is how We make the signs clear for people who understand
30|29|In fact, the wrongdoers merely follow their desires with no knowledge. Who then can guide those God has left to stray? They will have no helpers
30|30|So be steadfast in faith in all uprightness ˹O Prophet˺—the natural Way of God which He has instilled in ˹all˺ people. Let there be no change in this creation of God. That is the Straight Way, but most people do not know
30|31|˹O believers!˺ Always turn to Him ˹in repentance˺, be mindful of Him, and establish prayers. And do not be polytheists—
30|32|˹like˺ those who have divided their faith and split into sects, each rejoicing in what they have
30|33|When people are touched with hardship, they cry out to their Lord, turning to Him ˹alone˺. But as soon as He gives them a taste of His mercy, a group of them associates ˹others˺ with their Lord ˹in worship˺
30|34|becoming ungrateful for whatever ˹favours˺ We have given them. So enjoy yourselves, for soon you will know
30|35|Or have We sent down to them an authority which attests to what they associate ˹with Him˺
30|36|If We give people a taste of mercy, they become prideful ˹because˺ of it. But if they are afflicted with an evil for what their hands have done, they instantly fall into despair
30|37|Have they not seen that God gives abundant or limited provisions to whoever He wills? Surely in this are signs for people who believe
30|38|So give your close relatives their due, as well as the poor and the ˹needy˺ traveller. That is best for those who seek the pleasure of God, and it is they who will be successful
30|39|Whatever loans you give, ˹only˺ seeking interest at the expense of people’s wealth will not increase with God. But whatever charity you give, ˹only˺ seeking the pleasure of God—it is they whose reward will be multiplied
30|40|It is God Who created you, then gives you provisions, then will cause you to die, and then will bring you back to life. Can any of your associate-gods do any of this? Glorified and Exalted is He above what they associate with Him ˹in worship˺
30|41|Corruption has spread on land and sea as a result of what people’s hands have done, so that God may cause them to taste ˹the consequences of˺ some of their deeds and perhaps they might return ˹to the Right Path˺
30|42|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Travel throughout the land and see what was the end of those ˹destroyed˺ before ˹you˺—most of them were polytheists.”
30|43|So be steadfast in the Upright Faith ˹O Prophet˺, before the coming of a Day from God that cannot be averted. On that Day the people will be divided
30|44|those who disbelieved will bear ˹the burden of˺ their own disbelief; and those who did good will have prepared for themselves ˹eternal homes˺
30|45|so that He may ˹generously˺ reward those who believe and do good, out of His grace. He truly does not like the disbelievers
30|46|And one of His signs is that He sends the winds, ushering in good news ˹of rain˺ so that He may give you a taste of His mercy, and that ships may sail by His command, and that you may seek His bounty, and perhaps you will be grateful
30|47|Indeed, We sent before you ˹O Prophet˺ messengers, each to their own people, and they came to them with clear proofs. Then We inflicted punishment upon those who persisted in wickedness. For it is Our duty to help the believers
30|48|It is God Who sends the winds, which then stir up ˹vapour, forming˺ clouds, which He then spreads out in the sky or piles up into masses as He wills, from which you see rain come forth. Then as soon as He causes it to fall on whoever He wills of His servants, they rejoice
30|49|although they had utterly lost hope just before it was sent down to them
30|50|See then the impact of God’s mercy: how He gives life to the earth after its death! Surely That ˹same God˺ can raise the dead. For He is Most Capable of everything
30|51|Then if We send a ˹harsh˺ wind which they see withering ˹their˺ crops, they will definitely deny ˹old favours˺ right after
30|52|So you ˹O Prophet˺ certainly cannot make the dead hear ˹the truth˺. Nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn their backs and walk away
30|53|Nor can you lead the blind out of their misguidance. You can make none hear ˹the truth˺ except those who believe in Our revelations, ˹fully˺ submitting ˹to God˺
30|54|It is God Who created you in a state of weakness, then developed ˹your˺ weakness into strength, then developed ˹your˺ strength into weakness and old age. He creates whatever He wills. For He is the All-Knowing, Most Capable
30|55|And on the Day the Hour will arrive, the wicked will swear that they did not stay ˹in this world˺ more than an hour. In this way they were always deluded ˹in the world˺
30|56|But those gifted with knowledge and faith will say ˹to them˺, “You did actually stay—as destined by God—until the Day of Resurrection. So here is the Day of Resurrection ˹which you denied˺! But you did not know ˹it was true˺.”
30|57|So on that Day the wrongdoers’ excuses will not benefit them, nor will they be allowed to appease ˹their Lord˺
30|58|We have certainly set forth every ˹kind of˺ lesson for people in this Quran. And no matter what sign you bring to them ˹O Prophet˺, the disbelievers will definitely say ˹to the believers˺, “You are only a people of falsehood.”
30|59|This is how God seals the hearts of those unwilling to know ˹the truth˺
30|60|So be patient, for the promise of God certainly is true. And do not be disturbed by those who have no sure faith
31|1|Alif-Lãm-Mĩm
31|2|These are the verses of the Book, rich in wisdom
31|3|˹It is˺ a guide and mercy for the good-doers—
31|4|those who establish prayer, pay alms-tax, and have sure faith in the Hereafter
31|5|It is they who are ˹truly˺ guided by their Lord, and it is they who will be successful
31|6|But there are some who employ theatrics, only to lead others away from God’s Way—without any knowledge—and to make a mockery of it. They will suffer a humiliating punishment
31|7|Whenever Our revelations are recited to them, they turn away in arrogance as if they did not hear them, as if there is deafness in their ears. So give them good news ˹O Prophet˺ of a painful punishment
31|8|Surely those who believe and do good will have the Gardens of Bliss
31|9|staying there forever. God’s promise is true. And He is the Almighty, All-Wise
31|10|He created the heavens without pillars—as you can see—and placed firm mountains upon the earth so it does not shake with you, and scattered throughout it all types of creatures. And We send down rain from the sky, causing every type of fine plant to grow on earth
31|11|This is God’s creation. Now show Me what those ˹gods˺ other than Him have created. In fact, the wrongdoers are clearly astray
31|12|Indeed, We blessed Luqmân with wisdom, ˹saying˺, “Be grateful to God, for whoever is grateful, it is only for their own good. And whoever is ungrateful, then surely God is Self-Sufficient, Praiseworthy.”
31|13|And ˹remember˺ when Luqmân said to his son, while advising him, “O my dear son! Never associate ˹anything˺ with God ˹in worship˺, for associating ˹others with Him˺ is truly the worst of all wrongs.”
31|14|And We have commanded people to ˹honour˺ their parents. Their mothers bore them through hardship upon hardship, and their weaning takes two years. So be grateful to Me and your parents. To Me is the final return
31|15|But if they pressure you to associate with Me what you have no knowledge of, do not obey them. Still keep their company in this world courteously, and follow the way of those who turn to Me ˹in devotion˺. Then to Me you will ˹all˺ return, and then I will inform you of what you used to do
31|16|˹Luqmân added,˺ “O my dear son! ˹Even˺ if a deed were the weight of a mustard seed—be it ˹hidden˺ in a rock or in the heavens or the earth—God will bring it forth. Surely God is Most Subtle, All-Aware
31|17|“O my dear son! Establish prayer, encourage what is good and forbid what is evil, and endure patiently whatever befalls you. Surely this is a resolve to aspire to
31|18|“And do not turn your nose up to people, nor walk pridefully upon the earth. Surely God does not like whoever is arrogant, boastful
31|19|Be moderate in your pace. And lower your voice, for the ugliest of all voices is certainly the braying of donkeys.”
31|20|Have you not seen that God has subjected for you whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth, and has lavished His favours upon you, both seen and unseen? ˹Still˺ there are some who dispute about God without knowledge, or guidance, or an enlightening scripture
31|21|When it is said to them, “Follow what God has revealed,” they reply, “No! We ˹only˺ follow what we found our forefathers practicing.” ˹Would they still do so˺ even if Satan is inviting them to the torment of the Blaze
31|22|Whoever fully submits themselves to God and is a good-doer, they have certainly grasped the firmest hand-hold. And with God rests the outcome of ˹all˺ affairs
31|23|But whoever disbelieves, do not let their disbelief grieve you ˹O Prophet˺. To Us is their return, and We will inform them of all they did. Surely God knows best what is ˹hidden˺ in the heart
31|24|We allow them enjoyment for a little while, then ˹in time˺ We will force them into a harsh torment
31|25|And if you ask them who created the heavens and the earth, they will definitely say, “God!” Say, “Praise be to God!” In fact, most of them do not know
31|26|To God belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth. God is truly the Self-Sufficient, Praiseworthy
31|27|If all the trees on earth were pens and the ocean ˹were ink˺, refilled by seven other oceans, the Words of God would not be exhausted. Surely God is Almighty, All-Wise
31|28|The creation and resurrection of you ˹all˺ is as simple ˹for Him˺ as that of a single soul. Surely God is All-Hearing, All-Seeing
31|29|Do you not see that God causes the night to merge into the day and the day into the night, and has subjected the sun and the moon, each orbiting for an appointed term, and that God is All-Aware of what you do
31|30|That is because God ˹alone˺ is the Truth and what they invoke besides Him is falsehood, and ˹because˺ God ˹alone˺ is the Most High, All-Great
31|31|Do you not see that the ships sail ˹smoothly˺ through the sea by the grace of God so that He may show you some of His signs? Surely in this are signs for whoever is steadfast, grateful
31|32|And as soon as they are overwhelmed by waves like mountains, they cry out to God ˹alone˺ in sincere devotion. But when He delivers them ˹safely˺ to shore, only some become relatively grateful. And none rejects Our signs except whoever is deceitful, ungrateful
31|33|O humanity! Be mindful of your Lord, and beware of a Day when no parent will be of any benefit to their child, nor will a child be of any benefit to their parent. Surely God’s promise is true. So do not let the life of this world deceive you, nor let the Chief Deceiver deceive you about God
31|34|Indeed, God ˹alone˺ has the knowledge of the Hour. He sends down the rain, and knows what is in the wombs. No soul knows what it will earn for tomorrow, and no soul knows in what land it will die. Surely God is All-Knowing, All-Aware
32|1|Alif-Lãm-Mĩm
32|2|The revelation of this Book is—beyond doubt—from the Lord of all worlds
32|3|Or do they say, “He has fabricated it!”? No! It is the truth from your Lord in order for you to warn a people to whom no warner has come before you, so they may be ˹rightly˺ guided
32|4|It is God Who has created the heavens and the earth and everything in between in six Days, then established Himself on the Throne. You have no protector or intercessor besides Him. Will you not then be mindful
32|5|He conducts every affair from the heavens to the earth, then it all ascends to Him on a Day whose length is a thousand years by your counting
32|6|That is the Knower of the seen and unseen—the Almighty, Most Merciful
32|7|Who has perfected everything He created. And He originated the creation of humankind from clay
32|8|Then He made his descendants from an extract of a humble fluid
32|9|then He fashioned them and had a spirit of His Own ˹creation˺ breathed into them. And He gave you hearing, sight, and intellect. ˹Yet˺ you hardly give any thanks
32|10|˹Still˺ they ask ˹mockingly˺, “When we are disintegrated into the earth, will we really be raised as a new creation?” In fact, they are in denial of the meeting with their Lord
32|11|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Your soul will be taken by the Angel of Death, who is in charge of you. Then to your Lord you will ˹all˺ be returned.”
32|12|If only you could see the wicked hanging their heads ˹in shame˺ before their Lord, ˹crying:˺ “Our Lord! We have now seen and heard, so send us back and we will do good. We truly have sure faith ˹now˺!”
32|13|Had We willed, We could have easily imposed guidance on every soul. But My Word will come to pass: I will surely fill up Hell with jinn and humans all together
32|14|So taste ˹the punishment˺ for neglecting the meeting of this Day of yours. We ˹too˺ will certainly neglect you. And taste the torment of eternity for what you used to do
32|15|The only ˹true˺ believers in Our revelation are those who—when it is recited to them—fall into prostration and glorify the praises of their Lord and are not too proud
32|16|They abandon their beds, invoking their Lord with hope and fear, and donate from what We have provided for them
32|17|No soul can imagine what delights are kept in store for them as a reward for what they used to do
32|18|Is the one who is a believer equal ˹before God˺ to the one who is rebellious? They are not equal
32|19|As for those who believe and do good, they will have the Gardens of ˹Eternal˺ Residence—as an accommodation for what they used to do
32|20|But as for those who are rebellious, the Fire will be their home. Whenever they try to escape from it, they will be forced back into it, and will be told, “Taste the Fire’s torment, which you used to deny.”
32|21|We will certainly make them taste some of the minor torment ˹in this life˺ before the major torment ˹of the Hereafter˺, so perhaps they will return ˹to the Right Path˺
32|22|And who does more wrong than the one who is reminded of God’s revelations then turns away from them? We will surely inflict punishment upon the wicked
32|23|Indeed, We gave the Scripture to Moses—so let there be no doubt ˹O Prophet˺ that you ˹too˺ are receiving revelations—and We made it a guide for the Children of Israel
32|24|We raised from among them leaders, guiding by Our command, when they patiently endured and firmly believed in Our signs
32|25|Indeed, your Lord will decide between them on the Day of Judgment regarding their differences
32|26|Is it not yet clear to them how many peoples We destroyed before them, whose ruins they still pass by? Surely in this are signs. Will they not then listen
32|27|Do they not see how We drive rain to parched land, producing ˹various˺ crops from which they and their cattle eat? Will they not then see
32|28|They ask ˹mockingly˺, “When is this ˹Day of final˺ Decision, if what you say is true?”
32|29|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “On the Day of Decision it will not benefit the disbelievers to believe then, nor will they be delayed ˹from punishment˺.”
32|30|So turn away from them, and wait! They too are waiting
33|1|O Prophet! ˹Always˺ be mindful of God, and do not yield to the disbelievers and the hypocrites. Indeed, God is All-Knowing, All-Wise
33|2|Follow what is revealed to you from your Lord. Surely God is All-Aware of what you ˹all˺ do
33|3|And put your trust in God, for God is sufficient as a Trustee of Affairs
33|4|God does not place two hearts in any person’s chest. Nor does He regard your wives as ˹unlawful for you like˺ your real mothers, ˹even˺ if you say they are. Nor does He regard your adopted children as your real children. These are only your baseless assertions. But God declares the truth, and He ˹alone˺ guides to the ˹Right˺ Way
33|5|Let your adopted children keep their family names. That is more just in the sight of God. But if you do not know their fathers, then they are ˹simply˺ your fellow believers and close associates. There is no blame on you for what you do by mistake, but ˹only˺ for what you do intentionally. And God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
33|6|The Prophet has a stronger affinity to the believers than they do themselves. And his wives are their mothers. As ordained by God, blood relatives are more entitled ˹to inheritance˺ than ˹other˺ believers and immigrants, unless you ˹want to˺ show kindness to your ˹close˺ associates ˹through bequest˺. This is decreed in the Record
33|7|And ˹remember˺ when We took a covenant from the prophets, as well as from you ˹O Prophet˺, and from Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Jesus, son of Mary. We did take a solemn covenant from ˹all of˺ them
33|8|so that He may question these men of truth about their ˹delivery of the˺ truth. And He has prepared a painful punishment for the disbelievers
33|9|O believers! Remember God’s favour upon you when ˹enemy˺ forces came to ˹besiege˺ you ˹in Medina˺, so We sent against them a ˹bitter˺ wind and forces you could not see. And God is All-Seeing of what you do
33|10|˹Remember˺ when they came at you from east and west, when your eyes grew wild ˹in horror˺ and your hearts jumped into your throats, and you entertained ˹conflicting˺ thoughts about God
33|11|Then and there the believers were put to the test, and were violently shaken
33|12|And ˹remember˺ when the hypocrites and those with sickness in their hearts said, “God and His Messenger have promised us nothing but delusion!”
33|13|And ˹remember˺ when a group of them said, “O people of Yathrib! There is no point in you staying ˹here˺, so retreat!” Another group of them asked the Prophet’s permission ˹to leave˺, saying, “Our homes are vulnerable,” while ˹in fact˺ they were not vulnerable. They only wished to flee
33|14|Had their city been sacked from all sides and they had been asked to abandon faith, they would have done so with little hesitation
33|15|They had already pledged to God earlier never to turn their backs ˹in retreat˺. And a pledge to God must be answered for
33|16|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Fleeing will not benefit you if you ˹try to˺ escape a natural or violent death. ˹If it is not your time,˺ you will only be allowed enjoyment for a little while.”
33|17|Ask ˹them, O Prophet˺, “Who can put you out of God’s reach if He intends to harm you or show you mercy?” They can never find any protector or helper besides God
33|18|God knows well those among you who discourage ˹others from fighting˺, saying ˹secretly˺ to their brothers, “Stay with us,” and who themselves hardly take part in fighting
33|19|˹They are˺ totally unwilling to assist you. When danger comes, you see them staring at you with their eyes rolling like someone in the throes of death. But once the danger is over, they slash you with razor-sharp tongues, ravenous for ˹worldly˺ gains. Such people have not ˹truly˺ believed, so God has rendered their deeds void. And that is easy for God
33|20|They ˹still˺ think that the enemy alliance has not ˹yet˺ withdrawn. And if the allies were to come ˹again˺, the hypocrites would wish to be away in the desert among nomadic Arabs, ˹only˺ asking for news about you ˹believers˺. And if the hypocrites were in your midst, they would hardly take part in the fight
33|21|Indeed, in the Messenger of God you have an excellent example for whoever has hope in God and the Last Day, and remembers God often
33|22|When the believers saw the enemy alliance, they said, “This is what God and His Messenger had promised us. The promise of God and His Messenger has come true.” And this only increased them in faith and submission
33|23|Among the believers are men who have proven true to what they pledged to God. Some of them have fulfilled their pledge ˹with their lives˺, others are waiting ˹their turn˺. They have never changed ˹their commitment˺ in the least
33|24|˹It all happened˺ so God may reward the faithful for their faithfulness, and punish the hypocrites if He wills or turn to them ˹in mercy˺. Surely God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
33|25|And God drove back the disbelievers in their rage, totally empty-handed. And God spared the believers from fighting. For God is All-Powerful, Almighty
33|26|And He brought down those from the People of the Book who supported the enemy alliance from their own strongholds, and cast horror into their hearts. You ˹believers˺ killed some, and took others captive
33|27|He has also caused you to take over their lands, homes, and wealth, as well as lands you have not yet set foot on. And God is Most Capable of everything
33|28|O Prophet! Say to your wives, “If you desire the life of this world and its luxury, then come, I will give you a ˹suitable˺ compensation ˹for divorce˺ and let you go graciously
33|29|But if you desire God and His Messenger and the ˹everlasting˺ Home of the Hereafter, then Surely God has prepared a great reward for those of you who do good.”
33|30|O wives of the Prophet! If any of you were to commit a blatant misconduct, the punishment would be doubled for her. And that is easy for God
33|31|And whoever of you devoutly obeys God and His Messenger and does good, We will grant her double the reward, and We have prepared for her an honourable provision
33|32|O wives of the Prophet! You are not like any other women: if you are mindful ˹of God˺, then do not be overly effeminate in speech ˹with men˺ or those with sickness in their hearts may be tempted, but speak in a moderate tone
33|33|Settle in your homes, and do not display yourselves as women did in the days of ˹pre-Islamic˺ ignorance. Establish prayer, pay alms-tax, and obey God and His Messenger. God only intends to keep ˹the causes of˺ evil away from you and purify you completely, O members of the ˹Prophet’s˺ family
33|34|˹Always˺ remember what is recited in your homes of God’s revelations and ˹prophetic˺ wisdom. Surely God is Most Subtle, All-Aware
33|35|Surely ˹for˺ Muslim men and women, believing men and women, devout men and women, truthful men and women, patient men and women, humble men and women, charitable men and women, fasting men and women, men and women who guard their chastity, and men and women who remember God often—for ˹all of˺ them God has prepared forgiveness and a great reward
33|36|It is not for a believing man or woman—when God and His Messenger decree a matter—to have any other choice in that matter. Indeed, whoever disobeys God and His Messenger has clearly gone ˹far˺ astray
33|37|And ˹remember, O Prophet,˺ when you said to the one for whom God has done a favour and you ˹too˺ have done a favour, “Keep your wife and fear God,” while concealing within yourself what God was going to reveal. And ˹so˺ you were considering the people, whereas God was more worthy of your consideration. So when Zaid totally lost interest in ˹keeping˺ his wife, We gave her to you in marriage, so that there would be no blame on the believers for marrying the ex-wives of their adopted sons after their divorce. And God’s command is totally binding
33|38|There is no blame on the Prophet for doing what God has ordained for him. That has been the way of God with those ˹prophets˺ who had gone before. And God’s command has been firmly decreed
33|39|˹That is His way with˺ those ˹prophets˺ who deliver the messages of God, and consider Him, and none but God. And sufficient is God as a ˹vigilant˺ Reckoner
33|40|Muḥammad is not the father of any of your men, but is the Messenger of God and the seal of the prophets. And God has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all things
33|41|O believers! Always remember God often
33|42|and glorify Him morning and evening
33|43|He is the One Who showers His blessings upon you—and His angels pray for you—so that He may bring you out of darkness and into light. For He is ever Merciful to the believers
33|44|Their greeting on the Day they meet Him will be, “Peace!” And He has prepared for them an honourable reward
33|45|O Prophet! We have sent you as a witness, and a deliverer of good news, and a warner
33|46|and a caller to ˹the Way of˺ God by His command, and a beacon of light
33|47|Give good news to the believers that they will have a great bounty from God
33|48|Do not yield to the disbelievers and the hypocrites. Overlook their annoyances, and put your trust in God. For God is sufficient as a Trustee of Affairs
33|49|O believers! If you marry believing women and then divorce them before you touch them, they will have no waiting period for you to count, so give them a ˹suitable˺ compensation, and let them go graciously
33|50|O Prophet! We have made lawful for you your wives to whom you have paid their ˹full˺ dowries as well as those ˹bondwomen˺ in your possession, whom God has granted you. And ˹you are allowed to marry˺ the daughters of your paternal uncles and aunts, and the daughters of your maternal uncles and aunts, who have emigrated like you. Also ˹allowed for marriage is˺ a believing woman who offers herself to the Prophet ˹without dowry˺ if he is interested in marrying her—˹this is˺ exclusively for you, not for the rest of the believers. We know well what ˹rulings˺ We have ordained for the believers in relation to their wives and those ˹bondwomen˺ in their possession. As such, there would be no blame on you. And God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
33|51|It is up to you ˹O Prophet˺ to delay or receive whoever you please of your wives. There is no blame on you if you call back any of those you have set aside. That is more likely that they will be content, not grieved, and satisfied with what you offer them all. God ˹fully˺ knows what is in your hearts. And God is All-Knowing, Most Forbearing
33|52|It is not lawful for you ˹O Prophet˺ to marry more women after this, nor can you replace any of your present wives with another, even if her beauty may attract you—except those ˹bondwomen˺ in your possession. And God is ever Watchful over all things
33|53|O believers! Do not enter the homes of the Prophet without permission ˹and if invited˺ for a meal, do not ˹come too early and˺ linger until the meal is ready. But if you are invited, then enter ˹on time˺. Once you have eaten, then go on your way, and do not stay for casual talk. Such behaviour is truly annoying to the Prophet, yet he is too shy to ask you to leave. But God is never shy of the truth. And when you ˹believers˺ ask his wives for something, ask them from behind a barrier. This is purer for your hearts and theirs. And it is not right for you to annoy the Messenger of God, nor ever marry his wives after him. This would certainly be a major offence in the sight of God
33|54|Whether you reveal something or conceal it, surely God has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all things
33|55|There is no blame on the Prophet’s wives ˹if they appear unveiled˺ before their fathers, their sons, their brothers, their brothers’ sons, their sisters’ sons, their fellow ˹Muslim˺ women, and those ˹bondspeople˺ in their possession. And be mindful of God ˹O wives of the Prophet!˺ Surely God is a Witness over all things
33|56|Indeed, God showers His blessings upon the Prophet, and His angels pray for him. O believers! Invoke God’s blessings upon him, and salute him with worthy greetings of peace
33|57|Surely those who offend God and His Messenger are condemned by God in this world and the Hereafter. And He has prepared for them a humiliating punishment
33|58|As for those who abuse believing men and women unjustifiably, they will definitely bear the guilt of slander and blatant sin
33|59|O Prophet! Ask your wives, daughters, and believing women to draw their cloaks over their bodies. In this way it is more likely that they will be recognized ˹as virtuous˺ and not be harassed. And God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
33|60|If the hypocrites, and those with sickness in their hearts, and rumour-mongers in Medina do not desist, We will certainly incite you ˹O Prophet˺ against them, and then they will not be your neighbours there any longer
33|61|˹They deserve to be˺ condemned. ˹If they were to persist,˺ they would get themselves seized and killed relentlessly wherever they are found
33|62|That was God’s way with those ˹hypocrites˺ who have gone before. And you will find no change in God’s way
33|63|People ask you ˹O Prophet˺ about the Hour. Say, “That knowledge is only with God. You never know, perhaps the Hour is near.”
33|64|Surely God condemns the disbelievers, and has prepared for them a blazing Fire
33|65|to stay there for ever and ever—never will they find any protector or helper
33|66|On the Day their faces are ˹constantly˺ flipped in the Fire, they will cry, “Oh! If only we had obeyed God and obeyed the Messenger!”
33|67|And they will say, “Our Lord! We obeyed our leaders and elite, but they led us astray from the ˹Right˺ Way
33|68|Our Lord! Give them double ˹our˺ punishment, and condemn them tremendously.”
33|69|O believers! Do not be like those who slandered Moses, but God cleared him of what they said. And he was honourable in the sight of God
33|70|O believers! Be mindful of God, and say what is right
33|71|He will bless your deeds for you, and forgive your sins. And whoever obeys God and His Messenger, has truly achieved a great triumph
33|72|Indeed, We offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains, but they ˹all˺ declined to bear it, being fearful of it. But humanity assumed it, ˹for˺ they are truly wrongful ˹to themselves˺ and ignorant ˹of the consequences˺
33|73|so that God will punish hypocrite men and women and polytheistic men and women, and God will turn in mercy to believing men and women. For God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
34|1|All praise is for God, to Whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. And praise be to Him in the Hereafter. He is the All-Wise, All-Aware
34|2|He knows whatever goes into the earth and whatever comes out of it, and whatever descends from the sky and whatever ascends into it. And He is the Most Merciful, All-Forgiving
34|3|The disbelievers say, “The Hour will never come to us.” Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Yes—by my Lord, the Knower of the unseen—it will certainly come to you!” Not ˹even˺ an atom’s weight is hidden from Him in the heavens or the earth; nor anything smaller or larger than that, but is ˹written˺ in a perfect Record
34|4|So He may reward those who believe and do good. It is they who will have forgiveness and an honourable provision
34|5|As for those who strive to discredit Our revelations, it is they who will suffer the ˹worst˺ torment of agonizing pain
34|6|Those gifted with knowledge ˹clearly˺ see that what has been revealed to you from your Lord ˹O Prophet˺ is the truth, and that it guides to the Path of the Almighty, the Praiseworthy
34|7|The disbelievers say ˹mockingly to one another˺, “Shall we show you a man who claims that when you have been utterly disintegrated you will be raised as a new creation
34|8|Has he fabricated a lie against God or is he insane?” In fact, those who do not believe in the Hereafter are bound for torment and have strayed farthest ˹from the truth˺
34|9|Have they not then seen all that surrounds them of the heavens and the earth? If We willed, We could cause the earth to swallow them up, or cause ˹deadly˺ pieces of the sky to fall upon them. Surely in this is a sign for every servant who turns ˹to God˺
34|10|Indeed, We granted David a ˹great˺ privilege from Us, ˹commanding:˺ “O mountains! Echo his hymns! And the birds as well.” We made iron mouldable for him
34|11|instructing: “Make full-length armour, ˹perfectly˺ balancing the links. And work righteousness ˹O family of David!˺. Indeed, I am All-Seeing of what you do.”
34|12|And to Solomon ˹We subjected˺ the wind: its morning stride was a month’s journey and so was its evening stride. And We caused a stream of molten copper to flow for him, and ˹We subjected˺ some of the jinn to work under him by his Lord’s Will. And whoever of them deviated from Our command, We made them taste the torment of the blaze
34|13|They made for him whatever he desired of sanctuaries, statues, basins as large as reservoirs, and cooking pots fixed ˹into the ground˺. ˹We ordered:˺ “Work gratefully, O family of David!” ˹Only˺ a few of My servants are ˹truly˺ grateful
34|14|When We decreed Solomon’s death, nothing indicated to the ˹subjected˺ jinn that he was dead except the termites eating away his staff. So when he collapsed, the jinn realized that if they had ˹really˺ known the unseen, they would not have remained in ˹such˺ humiliating servitude
34|15|Indeed, there was a sign for ˹the tribe of˺ Sheba in their homeland: two orchards—one to the right and the other to the left. ˹They were told:˺ “Eat from the provision of your Lord, and be grateful to Him. ˹Yours is˺ a good land and a forgiving Lord.”
34|16|But they turned away. So We sent against them a devastating flood, and replaced their orchards with two others producing bitter fruit, fruitless bushes, and a few ˹sparse˺ thorny trees
34|17|This is how We rewarded them for their ingratitude. Would We ever punish ˹anyone in such a way˺ except the ungrateful
34|18|We had also placed between them and the cities We showered with blessings ˹many small˺ towns within sight of one another. And We set moderate travel distances in between, ˹saying,˺ “Travel between them by day and night safely.”
34|19|But they said, “Our Lord! Make ˹the distances of˺ our journeys longer,” wronging themselves. So We reduced them to ˹cautionary˺ tales, and scattered them utterly. Surely in this are lessons for whoever is steadfast, grateful
34|20|Indeed, Iblîs’ assumption about them has come true, so they ˹all˺ follow him, except a group of ˹true˺ believers
34|21|He does not have any authority over them, but ˹Our Will is˺ only to distinguish those who believe in the Hereafter from those who are in doubt about it. And your Lord is a ˹vigilant˺ Keeper over all things.”
34|22|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Call upon those you claim ˹to be divine˺ besides God. They do not possess ˹even˺ an atom’s weight either in the heavens or the earth, nor do they have any share in ˹governing˺ them. Nor is any of them a helper to Him.”
34|23|No intercession will be of any benefit with Him, except by those granted permission by Him. ˹At last,˺ when the dread ˹of Judgment Day˺ is relieved from their hearts ˹because they are permitted to intercede˺, they will ˹excitedly˺ ask ˹the angels˺, “What has your Lord ˹just˺ said?” The angels will reply, “The truth! And He is the Most High, All-Great.”
34|24|Ask ˹them, O Prophet˺, “Who provides for you from the heavens and the earth?” Say, “God! Now, certainly one of our two groups is ˹rightly˺ guided; the other is clearly astray.”
34|25|Say, “You will not be accountable for our misdeeds, nor will we be accountable for your deeds.”
34|26|Say, “Our Lord will gather us together, then He will judge between us with the truth. For He is the All-Knowing Judge.”
34|27|Say, “Show me those ˹idols˺ you have joined with Him as partners. No! In fact, He ˹alone˺ is God—the Almighty, All-Wise.”
34|28|We have sent you ˹O Prophet˺ only as a deliverer of good news and a warner to all of humanity, but most people do not know
34|29|And they ask ˹the believers˺, “When will this threat come to pass, if what you say is true?”
34|30|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “A Day has ˹already˺ been appointed for you, which you can neither delay nor advance by a ˹single˺ moment.”
34|31|The disbelievers vow, “We will never believe in this Quran, nor in those ˹Scriptures˺ before it.” If only you could see when the wrongdoers will be detained before their Lord, throwing blame at each other! The lowly ˹followers˺ will say to the arrogant ˹leaders˺, “Had it not been for you, we would certainly have been believers.”
34|32|The arrogant will respond to the lowly, “Did we ever hinder you from guidance after it came to you? In fact, you were wicked ˹on your own˺.”
34|33|The lowly will say to the arrogant, “No! It was your plotting by day and night—when you ordered us to disbelieve in God and to set up equals with Him.” They will ˹all˺ hide ˹their˺ remorse when they see the torment. And We will put shackles around the necks of the disbelievers. Will they be rewarded except for what they used to do
34|34|Whenever We sent a warner to a society, its elite would say, “We truly reject what you have been sent with.”
34|35|Adding, “We are far superior ˹to the believers˺ in wealth and children, and we will never be punished.”
34|36|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Surely ˹it is˺ my Lord ˹Who˺ gives abundant or limited provisions to whoever He wills. But most people do not know.”
34|37|It is not your wealth or children that bring you closer to Us. But those who believe and do good—it is they who will have a multiplied reward for what they did, and they will be secure in ˹elevated˺ mansions
34|38|As for those who strive to discredit Our revelations, it is they who will be confined in punishment
34|39|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Surely ˹it is˺ my Lord ˹Who˺ gives abundant or limited provisions to whoever He wills of His servants. And whatever you spend in charity, He will compensate ˹you˺ for it. For He is the Best Provider.”
34|40|And ˹consider˺ the Day He will gather them all together, and then ask the angels, “Was it you that these ˹polytheists˺ used to worship?”
34|41|They will say, “Glory be to You! Our loyalty is to You, not them. In fact, they ˹only˺ followed the ˹temptations of evil˺ jinn, in whom most of them had faith.”
34|42|So Today neither of you can benefit or protect each other. And We will say to the wrongdoers, “Taste the torment of the Fire, which you used to deny.”
34|43|When Our clear revelations are recited to them, they say, “This is only a man who wishes to hinder you from what your forefathers used to worship.” They also say, “This ˹Quran˺ is no more than a fabricated lie.” And the disbelievers say of the truth when it has come to them, “This is nothing but pure magic.”
34|44|˹They say so even though˺ We had never given them any scriptures to study, nor did We ever send them a warner before you ˹O Prophet˺
34|45|Those ˹destroyed˺ before them denied as well—and these ˹Meccans˺ have not attained even one-tenth of what We had given their predecessors. Yet ˹when˺ they denied My messengers, how severe was My response
34|46|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “I advise you to do ˹only˺ one thing: stand up for ˹the sake of˺ God—individually or in pairs—then reflect. Your fellow man is not insane. He is only a warner to you before ˹the coming of˺ a severe punishment.”
34|47|Say, “If I had ever asked you for a reward, you could keep it. My reward is only from God. And He is a Witness over all things.”
34|48|Say, “Surely my Lord hurls the truth ˹against falsehood˺. ˹He is˺ the Knower of all unseen.”
34|49|Say, “The truth has come, and falsehood will vanish, never to return.”
34|50|Say, “If I am astray, the loss is only mine. And if I am guided, it is ˹only˺ because of what my Lord reveals to me. He is indeed All-Hearing, Ever Near.”
34|51|If only you could see when they will be horrified with no escape ˹on Judgment Day˺! And they will be seized from a nearby place
34|52|They will ˹then˺ cry, “We do ˹now˺ believe in it ˹all˺.” But how could they ˹possibly˺ attain faith from a place so far-off ˹from the world˺
34|53|while they had already rejected it before, guessing blindly from a place ˹equally˺ far-away ˹from the Hereafter˺
34|54|They will be sealed off from whatever they desire, as was done to their counterparts before. Indeed, they were ˹all˺ in alarming doubt
35|1|All praise is for God, the Originator of the heavens and the earth, Who made angels ˹as His˺ messengers with wings—two, three, or four. He increases in creation whatever He wills. Surely God is Most Capable of everything
35|2|Whatever mercy God opens up for people, none can withhold it. And whatever He withholds, none but Him can release it. For He is the Almighty, All-Wise
35|3|O humanity! Remember God’s favours upon you. Is there any creator other than God who provides for you from the heavens and the earth? There is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him. How can you then be deluded ˹from the truth˺
35|4|If you are rejected by them, so too were messengers before you. And to God ˹all˺ matters will be returned ˹for judgment˺
35|5|O humanity! Indeed, God’s promise is true. So do not let the life of this world deceive you, nor let the Chief Deceiver deceive you about God
35|6|Surely Satan is an enemy to you, so take him as an enemy. He only invites his followers to become inmates of the Blaze
35|7|Those who disbelieve will have a severe punishment. But those who believe and do good will have forgiveness and a great reward
35|8|Are those whose evil-doing is made so appealing to them that they deem it good ˹like those who are rightly guided˺? ˹It is˺ certainly God ˹Who˺ leaves to stray whoever He wills, and guides whoever He wills. So do not grieve yourself to death over them ˹O Prophet˺. Surely God is All-Knowing of what they do
35|9|And it is God Who sends the winds, which then stir up ˹vapour, forming˺ clouds, and then We drive them to a lifeless land, giving life to the earth after its death. Similar is the Resurrection
35|10|Whoever seeks honour and power, then ˹let them know that˺ all honour and power belongs to God. To Him ˹alone˺ good words ascend, and righteous deeds are raised up by Him. As for those who plot evil, they will suffer a severe punishment. And the plotting of such ˹people˺ is doomed ˹to fail˺
35|11|And ˹it is˺ God ˹Who˺ created you from dust, then ˹developed you˺ from a sperm-drop, then made you into pairs. No female ever conceives or delivers without His knowledge. And no one’s life is made long or cut short but is ˹written˺ in a Record. That is certainly easy for God
35|12|The two bodies of water are not alike: one is fresh, palatable, and pleasant to drink and the other is salty and bitter. Yet from them both you eat tender seafood and extract ornaments to wear. And you see the ships ploughing their way through both, so you may seek His bounty and give thanks ˹to Him˺
35|13|He merges the night into the day and the day into the night, and has subjected the sun and the moon, each orbiting for an appointed term. That is God—your Lord! All authority belongs to Him. But those ˹idols˺ you invoke besides Him do not possess even the skin of a date stone
35|14|If you call upon them, they cannot hear your calls. And if they were to hear, they could not respond to you. On the Day of Judgment they will disown your worship ˹of them˺. And no one can inform you ˹O Prophet˺ like the All-Knowledgeable
35|15|O humanity! It is you who stand in need of God, but God ˹alone˺ is the Self-Sufficient, Praiseworthy
35|16|If He willed, He could eliminate you and produce a new creation
35|17|And that is not difficult for God ˹at all˺
35|18|No soul burdened with sin will bear the burden of another. And if a sin-burdened soul cries for help with its burden, none of it will be carried—even by a close relative. You ˹O Prophet˺ can only warn those who stand in awe of their Lord without seeing Him and establish prayer. Whoever purifies themselves, they only do so for their own good. And to God is the final return
35|19|Those blind ˹to the truth˺ and those who can see are not equal
35|20|nor are the darkness and the light
35|21|nor the ˹scorching˺ heat and the ˹cool˺ shade
35|22|Nor are the dead and the living equal. Indeed, God ˹alone˺ makes whoever He wills hear, but you ˹O Prophet˺ can never make those in the graves hear ˹your call˺
35|23|You are only a warner
35|24|We have surely sent you with the truth as a deliverer of good news and a warner. There is no community that has not had a warner
35|25|If they deny you, so did those before them. Their messengers came to them with clear proofs, divine Books, and enlightening Scriptures
35|26|Then I seized those who persisted in disbelief. How severe was My response
35|27|Do you not see that God sends down rain from the sky with which We bring forth fruits of different colours? And in the mountains are streaks of varying shades of white, red, and raven black
35|28|just as people, living beings, and cattle are of various colours as well. Of all of God’s servants, only the knowledgeable ˹of His might˺ are ˹truly˺ in awe of Him. God is indeed Almighty, All-Forgiving
35|29|Surely those who recite the Book of God, establish prayer, and donate from what We have provided for them—secretly and openly—˹can˺ hope for an exchange that will never fail
35|30|so that He will reward them in full and increase them out of His grace. He is truly All-Forgiving, Most Appreciative
35|31|The Book We have revealed to you ˹O Prophet˺ is the truth, confirming what came before it. Surely God is All-Aware, All-Seeing of His servants
35|32|Then We granted the Book to those We have chosen from Our servants. Some of them wrong themselves, some follow a middle course, and some are foremost in good deeds by God’s Will. That is ˹truly˺ the greatest bounty
35|33|They will enter the Gardens of Eternity, where they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls, and their clothing will be silk
35|34|And they will say, “Praise be to God, Who has kept away from us all ˹causes of˺ sorrow. Our Lord is indeed All-Forgiving, Most Appreciative
35|35|˹He is the One˺ Who—out of His grace—has settled us in the Home of Everlasting Stay, where we will be touched by neither fatigue nor weariness.”
35|36|As for the disbelievers, they will have the Fire of Hell, where they will not be ˹allowed to be˺ finished by death, nor will its torment be lightened for them. This is how We reward every ˹stubborn˺ disbeliever
35|37|There they will be ˹fervently˺ screaming, “Our Lord! Take us out ˹and send us back˺. We will do good, unlike what we used to do.” ˹They will be told,˺ “Did We not give you lives long enough so that whoever wanted to be mindful could have done so? And the warner came to you. So taste ˹the punishment˺, for the wrongdoers have no helper.”
35|38|Indeed, God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He surely knows best what is ˹hidden˺ in the heart
35|39|He is the One Who has placed you as successors on earth. So whoever disbelieves will bear ˹the burden of˺ their own disbelief. The disbelievers’ denial only increases them in contempt in the sight of their Lord, and it will only contribute to their loss
35|40|Ask ˹them, O Prophet˺, “Have you considered your associate-gods which you invoke besides God? Show me what they have created on earth! Or do they have a share in ˹the creation of˺ the heavens? Or have We given the polytheists a Book, which serves as a clear proof for them? In fact, the wrongdoers promise each other nothing but delusion.”
35|41|Indeed, God ˹alone˺ keeps the heavens and the earth from falling apart. If they were to fall apart, none but Him could hold them up. He is truly Most Forbearing, All-Forgiving
35|42|They swore by God their most solemn oaths that if a warner were to come to them, they would certainly be better guided than any other community. Yet when a warner did come to them, it only drove them farther away—
35|43|behaving arrogantly in the land and plotting evil. But evil plotting only backfires on those who plot. Are they awaiting anything but the fate of those ˹destroyed˺ before? You will find no change in the way of God, nor will you find it diverted ˹to someone else˺
35|44|Have they not travelled throughout the land to see what was the end of those ˹destroyed˺ before them? They were far superior in might. But there is nothing that can escape God in the heavens or the earth. He is certainly All-Knowing, Most Capable
35|45|If God were to punish people ˹immediately˺ for what they have committed, He would not have left a single living being on earth. But He delays them for an appointed term. And when their time arrives, then surely God is All-Seeing of His servants
36|1|Yâ-Sĩn
36|2|By the Quran, rich in wisdom
36|3|You ˹O Prophet˺ are truly one of the messengers
36|4|upon the Straight Path
36|5|˹This is˺ a revelation from the Almighty, Most Merciful
36|6|so that you may warn a people whose forefathers were not warned, and so are heedless
36|7|The decree ˹of torment˺ has already been justified against most of them, for they will never believe
36|8|˹It is as if˺ We have put shackles around their necks up to their chins, so their heads are forced up
36|9|and have placed a barrier before them and a barrier behind them and covered them ˹all˺ up, so they fail to see ˹the truth˺
36|10|It is the same whether you warn them or not—they will never believe
36|11|You can only warn those who follow the Reminder and are in awe of the Most Compassionate without seeing Him. So give them good news of forgiveness and an honourable reward
36|12|It is certainly We Who resurrect the dead, and write what they send forth and what they leave behind. Everything is listed by Us in a perfect Record
36|13|Give them an example ˹O Prophet˺ of the residents of a town, when the messengers came to them
36|14|We sent them two messengers, but they rejected both. So We reinforced ˹the two˺ with a third, and they declared, “We have indeed been sent to you ˹as messengers˺.”
36|15|The people replied, “You are only humans like us, and the Most Compassionate has not revealed anything. You are simply lying!”
36|16|The messengers responded, “Our Lord knows that we have truly been sent to you
36|17|And our duty is only to deliver ˹the message˺ clearly.”
36|18|The people replied, “We definitely see you as a bad omen for us. If you do not desist, we will certainly stone you ˹to death˺ and you will be touched with a painful punishment from us.”
36|19|The messengers said, “Your bad omen lies within yourselves. Are you saying this because you are reminded ˹of the truth˺? In fact, you are a transgressing people.”
36|20|Then from the farthest end of the city a man came, rushing. He advised, “O my people! Follow the messengers
36|21|Follow those who ask no reward of you, and are ˹rightly˺ guided
36|22|And why should I not worship the One Who has originated me, and to Whom you will be returned
36|23|How could I take besides Him other gods whose intercession would not be of any benefit to me, nor could they save me if the Most Compassionate intended to harm me
36|24|Indeed, I would then be clearly astray
36|25|I do believe in your Lord, so listen to me.”
36|26|˹But they killed him, then˺ he was told ˹by the angels˺, “Enter Paradise!” He said, “If only my people knew
36|27|of how my Lord has forgiven me, and made me one of the honourable.”
36|28|We did not send any soldiers from the heavens against his people after his death, nor did We need to
36|29|All it took was one ˹mighty˺ blast, and they were extinguished at once
36|30|Oh pity, such beings! No messenger ever came to them without being mocked
36|31|Have the deniers not considered how many peoples We destroyed before them who never came back to life again
36|32|Yet they will all be brought before Us
36|33|There is a sign for them in the dead earth: We give it life, producing grain from it for them to eat
36|34|And We have placed in it gardens of palm trees and grapevines, and caused springs to gush forth in it
36|35|so that they may eat from its fruit, which they had no hand in making. Will they not then give thanks
36|36|Glory be to the One Who created all ˹things in˺ pairs—˹be it˺ what the earth produces, their genders, or what they do not know
36|37|There is also a sign for them in the night: We strip from it daylight, then—behold!—they are in darkness
36|38|The sun travels for its fixed term. That is the design of the Almighty, All-Knowing
36|39|As for the moon, We have ordained ˹precise˺ phases for it, until it ends up like an old, curved palm stalk
36|40|It is not for the sun to catch up with the moon, nor does the night outrun the day. Each is travelling in an orbit of their own
36|41|Another sign for them is that We carried their ancestors ˹with Noah˺ in the fully loaded Ark
36|42|and created for them similar things to ride in
36|43|If We willed, We could drown them: then no one would respond to their cries, nor would they be rescued—
36|44|except by mercy from Us, allowing them enjoyment for a ˹little˺ while
36|45|˹Still they turn away˺ when it is said to them, “Beware of what is ahead of you ˹in the Hereafter˺ and what is behind you ˹of destroyed nations˺ so you may be shown mercy.”
36|46|Whenever a sign comes to them from their Lord, they turn away from it
36|47|And when it is said to them, “Donate from what God has provided for you,” the disbelievers say to the believers, “Why should we feed those whom God could have fed if He wanted to? You are clearly astray!”
36|48|And they ask ˹the believers˺, “When will this threat come to pass, if what you say is true?”
36|49|They must be awaiting a single Blast, which will seize them while they are ˹entrenched˺ in ˹worldly˺ disputes
36|50|Then they will not be able to make a ˹last˺ will, nor can they return to their own people
36|51|The Trumpet will be blown ˹a second time˺, then—behold!—they will rush from the graves to their Lord
36|52|They will cry, “Woe to us! Who has raised us up from our place of rest? This must be what the Most Compassionate warned us of; the messengers told the truth!”
36|53|It will only take one Blast, then at once they will all be brought before Us
36|54|On that Day no soul will be wronged in the least, nor will you be rewarded except for what you used to do
36|55|Indeed, on that Day the residents of Paradise will be busy enjoying themselves
36|56|They and their spouses will be in ˹cool˺ shade, reclining on ˹canopied˺ couches
36|57|There they will have fruits and whatever they desire
36|58|And “Peace!” will be ˹their˺ greeting from the Merciful Lord
36|59|˹Then the disbelievers will be told,˺ “Step away ˹from the believers˺ this Day, O wicked ones
36|60|Did I not command you, O Children of Adam, not to follow Satan, for he is truly your sworn enemy
36|61|but to worship Me ˹alone˺? This is the Straight Path
36|62|Yet he already misled great multitudes of you. Did you not have any sense
36|63|This is the Hell you were warned of
36|64|Burn in it Today for your disbelief.”
36|65|On this Day We will seal their mouths, their hands will speak to Us, and their feet will testify to what they used to commit
36|66|Had We willed, We could have easily blinded their eyes, so they would struggle to find their way. How then could they see
36|67|And had We willed, We could have transfigured them on the spot, so they could neither progress forward nor turn back
36|68|And whoever We grant a long life, We reverse them in development. Will they not then understand
36|69|We have not taught him poetry, nor is it fitting for him. This ˹Book˺ is only a Reminder and a clear Quran
36|70|to warn whoever is ˹truly˺ alive and fulfil the decree ˹of torment˺ against the disbelievers
36|71|Do they not see that We singlehandedly created for them, among other things, cattle which are under their control
36|72|And We have subjected these ˹animals˺ to them, so they may ride some and eat others
36|73|And they derive from them other benefits and drinks. Will they not then give thanks
36|74|Still they have taken other gods besides God, hoping to be helped ˹by them˺
36|75|They cannot help the pagans, even though they serve the idols as dedicated guards
36|76|So do not let their words grieve you ˹O Prophet˺. Indeed, We ˹fully˺ know what they conceal and what they reveal
36|77|Do people not see that We have created them from a sperm-drop, then—behold!—they openly challenge ˹Us˺
36|78|And they argue with Us—forgetting they were created—saying, “Who will give life to decayed bones?”
36|79|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “They will be revived by the One Who produced them the first time, for He has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of every created being
36|80|˹He is the One˺ Who gives you fire from green trees, and—behold!—you kindle ˹fire˺ from them
36|81|Can the One Who created the heavens and the earth not ˹easily˺ resurrect these ˹deniers˺?” Yes ˹He can˺! For He is the Master Creator, All-Knowing
36|82|All it takes, when He wills something ˹to be˺, is simply to say to it: “Be!” And it is
36|83|So glory be to the One in Whose Hands is the authority over all things, and to Whom ˹alone˺ you will ˹all˺ be returned
37|1|By those ˹angels˺ lined up in ranks
37|2|and those who diligently drive ˹the clouds˺
37|3|and those who recite the Reminder
37|4|Surely your God is One
37|5|˹He is˺ the Lord of the heavens and the earth and everything in between, and the Lord of all points of sunrise
37|6|Indeed, We have adorned the lowest heaven with the stars for decoration
37|7|and ˹for˺ protection from every rebellious devil
37|8|They cannot listen to the highest assembly ˹of angels˺ for they are pelted from every side
37|9|˹fiercely˺ driven away. And they will suffer an everlasting torment
37|10|But whoever manages to stealthily eavesdrop is ˹instantly˺ pursued by a piercing flare
37|11|So ask them ˹O Prophet˺, which is harder to create: them or other marvels of Our creation? Indeed, We created them from a sticky clay
37|12|In fact, you are astonished ˹by their denial˺, while they ridicule ˹you˺
37|13|When they are reminded, they are never mindful
37|14|And whenever they see a sign, they make fun of it
37|15|saying, “This is nothing but pure magic
37|16|When we are dead and reduced to dust and bones, will we really be resurrected
37|17|And our forefathers as well?”
37|18|Say, “Yes! And you will be fully humbled.”
37|19|It will only take one Blast, then at once they will see ˹it all˺
37|20|They will cry, “Oh, woe to us! This is the Day of Judgment!”
37|21|˹They will be told,˺ “This is the Day of ˹Final˺ Decision which you used to deny.”
37|22|˹God will say to the angels,˺ “Gather ˹all˺ the wrongdoers along with their peers, and whatever they used to worship
37|23|instead of God, then lead them ˹all˺ to the path of Hell
37|24|And detain them, for they must be questioned.”
37|25|˹Then they will be asked,˺ “What is the matter with you that you can no longer help each other?”
37|26|In fact, on that Day they will be ˹fully˺ submissive
37|27|They will turn on each other, throwing blame
37|28|The misled will say, “It was you who deluded us away from what is right.”
37|29|The misleaders will reply, “No! You disbelieved on your own
37|30|We had no authority over you. In fact, you yourselves were a transgressing people
37|31|The decree of our Lord has come to pass against us ˹all˺: we will certainly taste ˹the punishment˺
37|32|We caused you to deviate, for we ourselves were deviant.”
37|33|Surely on that Day they will ˹all˺ share in the punishment
37|34|That is certainly how We deal with the wicked
37|35|For whenever it was said to them ˹in the world˺, “There is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except God,” they acted arrogantly
37|36|and argued, “Should we really abandon our gods for a mad poet?”
37|37|In fact, he came with the truth, confirming ˹earlier˺ messengers
37|38|You will certainly taste the painful torment
37|39|and will only be rewarded for what you used to do
37|40|But not the chosen servants of God
37|41|They will have a known provision
37|42|fruits ˹of every type˺. And they will be honoured
37|43|in the Gardens of Bliss
37|44|facing each other on thrones
37|45|A drink ˹of pure wine˺ will be passed around to them from a flowing stream
37|46|crystal-white, delicious to drink
37|47|It will neither harm ˹them˺, nor will they be intoxicated by it
37|48|And with them will be maidens of modest gaze and gorgeous eyes
37|49|as if they were pristine pearls
37|50|Then they will turn to one another inquisitively
37|51|One of them will say, “I once had a companion ˹in the world˺
37|52|who used to ask ˹me˺, ‘Do you actually believe ˹in resurrection˺
37|53|When we are dead and reduced to dust and bones, will we really be brought to judgment?’”
37|54|He will ˹then˺ ask, “Would you care to see ˹his fate˺?”
37|55|Then he ˹and the others˺ will look and spot him in the midst of the Hellfire
37|56|He will ˹then˺ say, “By God! You nearly ruined me
37|57|Had it not been for the grace of my Lord, I ˹too˺ would have certainly been among those brought ˹to Hell˺.”
37|58|˹Then he will ask his fellow believers,˺ “Can you imagine that we will never die
37|59|except our first death, nor be punished ˹like the others˺?”
37|60|This is truly the ultimate triumph
37|61|For such ˹honour˺ all should strive
37|62|Is this ˹bliss˺ a better accommodation or the tree of Zaqqûm
37|63|We have surely made it a test for the wrongdoers
37|64|Indeed, it is a tree that grows in the depths of Hell
37|65|bearing fruit like devils’ heads
37|66|The evildoers will certainly ˹be left to˺ eat from it, filling up their bellies with it
37|67|Then on top of that they will be given a blend of boiling drink
37|68|Then they will ultimately return to ˹their place in˺ Hell
37|69|Indeed, they found their forefathers astray
37|70|so they rushed in their footsteps
37|71|And surely most of the earlier generations had strayed before them
37|72|although We had certainly sent warners among them
37|73|See then what was the end of those who had been warned
37|74|But not the chosen servants of God
37|75|Indeed, Noah cried out to Us, and how excellent are We in responding
37|76|We delivered him and his family from the great distress
37|77|and made his descendants the sole survivors
37|78|And We blessed him ˹with honourable mention˺ among later generations
37|79|“Peace be upon Noah among all peoples.”
37|80|Indeed, this is how We reward the good-doers
37|81|˹For˺ he was truly one of Our faithful servants
37|82|Then We drowned the others
37|83|And indeed, one of those who followed his way was Abraham
37|84|˹Remember˺ when he came to his Lord with a pure heart
37|85|and said to his father and his people, “What are you worshipping
37|86|Is it false gods that you desire instead of God
37|87|What then do you expect from the Lord of all worlds?”
37|88|He later looked up to the stars ˹in contemplation˺
37|89|then said, “I am really sick.”
37|90|So they turned their backs on him and went away
37|91|Then he ˹stealthily˺ advanced towards their gods, and said ˹mockingly˺, “Will you not eat ˹your offerings˺
37|92|What is wrong with you that you cannot speak?”
37|93|Then he swiftly turned on them, striking ˹them˺ with his right hand
37|94|Later, his people came rushing towards him ˹furiously˺
37|95|He argued, “How can you worship what you carve ˹with your own hands˺
37|96|when it is God Who created you and whatever you do?”
37|97|They said ˹to one another˺, “Build him a furnace and cast him into the blazing fire.”
37|98|And so they sought to harm him, but We made them inferior
37|99|He later said, “I am leaving ˹in obedience˺ to my Lord. He will guide me
37|100|My Lord! Bless me with righteous offspring.”
37|101|So We gave him good news of a forbearing son
37|102|Then when the boy reached the age to work with him, Abraham said, “O my dear son! I have seen in a dream that I ˹must˺ sacrifice you. So tell me what you think.” He replied, “O my dear father! Do as you are commanded. God willing, you will find me steadfast.”
37|103|Then when they submitted ˹to God’s Will˺, and Abraham laid him on the side of his forehead ˹for sacrifice˺
37|104|We called out to him, “O Abraham
37|105|You have already fulfilled the vision.” Indeed, this is how We reward the good-doers
37|106|That was truly a revealing test
37|107|And We ransomed his son with a great sacrifice
37|108|and blessed Abraham ˹with honourable mention˺ among later generations
37|109|“Peace be upon Abraham.”
37|110|This is how We reward the good-doers
37|111|He was truly one of Our faithful servants
37|112|We ˹later˺ gave him good news of Isaac—a prophet, and one of the righteous
37|113|We blessed him and Isaac as well. Some of their descendants did good, while others clearly wronged themselves
37|114|And We certainly showed favour to Moses and Aaron
37|115|and delivered them and their people from the great distress
37|116|We helped them so it was they who prevailed
37|117|We gave them the clear Scripture
37|118|and guided them to the Straight Path
37|119|And We blessed them ˹with honourable mention˺ among later generations
37|120|“Peace be upon Moses and Aaron.”
37|121|Indeed, this is how We reward the good-doers
37|122|They were truly ˹two˺ of Our faithful servants
37|123|And Elias was indeed one of the messengers
37|124|˹Remember˺ when he said to his people, “Will you not fear ˹God˺
37|125|Do you call upon ˹the idol of˺ Ba’l and abandon the Best of Creators—
37|126|God, your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers?”
37|127|But they rejected him, so they will certainly be brought ˹for punishment˺
37|128|But not the chosen servants of God
37|129|We blessed him ˹with honourable mention˺ among later generations
37|130|“Peace be upon Elias.”
37|131|Indeed, this is how We reward the good-doers
37|132|He was truly one of Our faithful servants
37|133|And Lot was indeed one of the messengers
37|134|˹Remember˺ when We delivered him and all of his family
37|135|except an old woman, who was one of the doomed
37|136|Then We ˹utterly˺ destroyed the rest
37|137|You ˹Meccans˺ certainly pass by their ruins day
37|138|and night. Will you not then understand
37|139|And Jonah was indeed one of the messengers
37|140|˹Remember˺ when he fled to the overloaded ship
37|141|Then ˹to save it from sinking,˺ he drew straws ˹with other passengers˺. He lost ˹and was thrown overboard˺
37|142|Then the whale engulfed him while he was blameworthy
37|143|Had he not ˹constantly˺ glorified ˹God˺
37|144|he would have certainly remained in its belly until the Day of Resurrection
37|145|But We cast him onto the open ˹shore˺, ˹totally˺ worn out
37|146|and caused a squash plant to grow over him
37|147|We ˹later˺ sent him ˹back˺ to ˹his city of˺ at least one hundred thousand people
37|148|who then believed ˹in him˺, so We allowed them enjoyment for a while
37|149|Ask them ˹O Prophet˺ if your Lord has daughters, while the pagans ˹prefer to˺ have sons
37|150|Or ˹ask them˺ if We created the angels as females right before their eyes
37|151|Indeed, it is one of their ˹outrageous˺ fabrications to say
37|152|“God has children.” They are simply liars
37|153|Has He chosen daughters over sons
37|154|What is the matter with you? How do you judge
37|155|Will you not then be mindful
37|156|Or do you have ˹any˺ compelling proof
37|157|Then bring ˹us˺ your scripture, if what you say is true
37|158|They have also established a ˹marital˺ relationship between Him and the jinn. Yet the jinn ˹themselves˺ know well that such people will certainly be brought ˹for punishment˺
37|159|Glorified is God far above what they claim
37|160|But not the chosen servants of God
37|161|Surely you ˹pagans˺ and whatever ˹idols˺ you worship
37|162|can never lure ˹anyone˺ away from Him
37|163|except those ˹destined˺ to burn in Hell
37|164|˹The angels respond,˺ “There is not one of us without an assigned station ˹of worship˺
37|165|We are indeed the ones lined up in ranks ˹for God˺
37|166|And we are indeed the ones ˹constantly˺ glorifying ˹His praise˺.”
37|167|They certainly used to say
37|168|“If only we had a Reminder like ˹those of˺ earlier peoples
37|169|we would have truly been God’s devoted servants.”
37|170|But ˹now˺ they reject it, so they will soon know
37|171|Our Word has already gone forth to Our servants, the messengers
37|172|that they would surely be helped
37|173|and that Our forces will certainly prevail
37|174|So turn away from the deniers for a while ˹O Prophet˺
37|175|You will see ˹what will happen to˺ them, and they too will see
37|176|Do they ˹really˺ wish to hasten Our punishment
37|177|Yet when it descends upon them: how evil will that morning be for those who had been warned
37|178|And turn away from them for a while
37|179|You will see, and they too will see
37|180|Glorified is your Lord—the Lord of Honour and Power—above what they claim
37|181|Peace be upon the messengers
37|182|And praise be to God—Lord of all worlds
38|1|Ṣãd. By the Quran, full of reminders
38|2|˹This is the truth,˺ yet the disbelievers are ˹entrenched˺ in arrogance and opposition
38|3|˹Imagine˺ how many peoples We destroyed before them, and they cried out when it was too late to escape
38|4|Now, the pagans are astonished that a warner has come to them from among themselves. And the disbelievers say, “This is a magician, a total liar
38|5|Has he reduced ˹all˺ the gods to One God? Indeed, this is something totally astonishing.”
38|6|The chiefs among them went forth saying, “Carry on, and stand firm in devotion to your gods. Certainly this is just a scheme ˹for power˺
38|7|We have never heard of this in the previous faith. This is nothing but a fabrication
38|8|Has the Reminder been revealed ˹only˺ to him out of ˹all of˺ us?” In fact, they are ˹only˺ in doubt of My ˹revealed˺ Reminder. In fact, ˹they do so because˺ they have not yet tasted My punishment
38|9|Or ˹is it because˺ they possess the treasuries of the mercy of your Lord—the Almighty, the Giver ˹of all bounties˺
38|10|Or ˹is it because˺ the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and everything in between belongs to them? Let them then climb their way ˹to heaven, if their claim is true˺
38|11|This is just another ˹enemy˺ force bound for defeat out there
38|12|Before them, the people of Noah denied ˹the truth˺, as did ’Âd, Pharaoh of the mighty structures
38|13|Thamûd, the people of Lot, and the residents of the Forest. These were ˹all˺ enemy forces
38|14|Each rejected their messenger, so My punishment was justified
38|15|These ˹pagans˺ are awaiting nothing but a single Blast that cannot be stopped
38|16|They say ˹mockingly˺, “Our Lord! Hasten for us our share ˹of the punishment˺ before the Day of Reckoning.”
38|17|Be patient ˹O Prophet˺ with what they say. And remember Our servant, David, the man of strength. Indeed, he ˹constantly˺ turned ˹to God˺
38|18|We truly subjected the mountains to hymn ˹Our praises˺ along with him in the evening and after sunrise
38|19|And ˹We subjected˺ the birds, flocking together. All turned to him ˹echoing his hymns˺
38|20|We strengthened his kingship, and gave him wisdom and sound judgment
38|21|Has the story of the two plaintiffs, who scaled the ˹wall of David’s˺ sanctuary, reached you ˹O Prophet˺
38|22|When they came into David’s presence, he was startled by them. They said, “Have no fear. ˹We are merely˺ two in a dispute: one of us has wronged the other. So judge between us with truth—do not go beyond ˹it˺—and guide us to the right way
38|23|This is my brother. He has ninety-nine sheep while I have ˹only˺ one. ˹Still˺ he asked me to give it up to him, overwhelming me with ˹his˺ argument.”
38|24|David ˹eventually˺ ruled, “He has definitely wronged you in demanding ˹to add˺ your sheep to his. And certainly many partners wrong each other, except those who believe and do good—but how few are they!” Then David realized that We had tested him so he asked for his Lord’s forgiveness, fell down in prostration, and turned ˹to Him in repentance˺
38|25|So We forgave that for him. And he will indeed have ˹a status of˺ closeness to Us and an honourable destination
38|26|˹We instructed him:˺ “O David! We have surely made you an authority in the land, so judge between people with truth. And do not follow ˹your˺ desires or they will lead you astray from God’s Way. Surely those who go astray from God’s Way will suffer a severe punishment for neglecting the Day of Reckoning.”
38|27|We have not created the heavens and earth and everything in between without purpose—as the disbelievers think. So woe to the disbelievers because of the Fire
38|28|Or should We treat those who believe and do good like those who make mischief throughout the land? Or should We treat the righteous like the wicked
38|29|˹This is˺ a blessed Book which We have revealed to you ˹O Prophet˺ so that they may contemplate its verses, and people of reason may be mindful
38|30|And We blessed David with Solomon—what an excellent servant ˹he was˺! Indeed, he ˹constantly˺ turned ˹to God˺
38|31|˹Remember˺ when the well-trained, swift horses were paraded before him in the evening
38|32|He then proclaimed, “I am truly in love with ˹these˺ fine things out of remembrance for God,” until they went out of sight
38|33|˹He ordered,˺ “Bring them back to me!” Then he began to rub down their legs and necks
38|34|And indeed, We tested Solomon, placing a ˹deformed˺ body on his throne, then he turned ˹to God in repentance˺
38|35|He prayed, “My Lord! Forgive me, and grant me an authority that will never be matched by anyone after me. You are indeed the Giver ˹of all bounties˺.”
38|36|So We subjected to him the wind, blowing gently at his command to wherever he pleased
38|37|And ˹We subjected to him˺ every builder and diver of the jinn
38|38|and others bound together in chains
38|39|˹God said,˺ “This is Our gift, so give or withhold ˹as you wish˺, never to be called to account.”
38|40|And he will indeed have ˹a status of˺ closeness to Us and an honourable destination
38|41|And remember Our servant Job, when he cried out to his Lord, “Satan has afflicted me with distress and suffering.”
38|42|˹We responded,˺ “Stomp your foot: ˹now˺ here is a cool ˹and refreshing˺ spring for washing and drinking.”
38|43|And We gave him back his family, twice as many, as a mercy from Us and a lesson for people of reason
38|44|˹And We said to him,˺ “Take in your hand a bundle of grass, and strike ˹your wife˺ with it, and do not break your oath.” We truly found him patient. What an excellent servant ˹he was˺! Indeed, he ˹constantly˺ turned ˹to God˺
38|45|And remember Our servants: Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob—the men of strength and insight
38|46|We truly chose them for the honour of proclaiming the Hereafter
38|47|And in Our sight they are truly among the chosen and the finest
38|48|Also remember Ishmael, Elisha, and Ⱬul-Kifl. All are among the best
38|49|This is ˹all˺ a reminder. And the righteous will certainly have an honourable destination
38|50|the Gardens of Eternity, whose gates will be open for them
38|51|There they will recline, calling for abundant fruit and drink
38|52|And with them will be maidens of modest gaze and equal age
38|53|This is what you are promised for the Day of Reckoning
38|54|This is indeed Our provision that will never end
38|55|That is that. And the transgressors will certainly have the worst destination
38|56|Hell, where they will burn. What an evil place to rest
38|57|Let them then taste this: boiling water and ˹oozing˺ pus
38|58|and other torments of the same sort
38|59|˹The misleaders will say to one another,˺ “Here is a crowd ˹of followers˺ being thrown in with us. They are not welcome, ˹for˺ they ˹too˺ will burn in the Fire.”
38|60|The followers will respond, “No! You are not welcome! You brought this upon us. What an evil place for settlement!”
38|61|Adding, “Our Lord! Whoever brought this upon us, double their punishment in the Fire.”
38|62|The tyrants will ask ˹one another˺, “But why do we not see those we considered to be lowly
38|63|Were we wrong in mocking them ˹in the world˺? Or do our eyes ˹just˺ fail to see them ˹in the Fire˺?”
38|64|This dispute between the residents of the Fire will certainly come to pass
38|65|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “I am only a warner. And there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except God—the One, the Supreme
38|66|˹He is the˺ Lord of the heavens and the earth and everything in between—the Almighty, Most Forgiving.”
38|67|Say, “This ˹Quran˺ is momentous news
38|68|from which you ˹pagans˺ are turning away.”
38|69|˹And say,˺ “I had no knowledge of the highest assembly ˹in heaven˺ when they differed ˹concerning Adam˺
38|70|What is revealed to me is that I am only sent with a clear warning.”
38|71|˹Remember, O Prophet˺ when your Lord said to the angels, “I am going to create a human being from clay
38|72|So when I have fashioned him and had a spirit of My Own ˹creation˺ breathed into him, fall down in prostration to him.”
38|73|So the angels prostrated all together—
38|74|but not Iblîs, who acted arrogantly, becoming unfaithful
38|75|God asked, “O Iblîs! What prevented you from prostrating to what I created with My Own Hands? Did you ˹just˺ become proud? Or have you always been arrogant?”
38|76|He replied, “I am better than he is: You created me from fire and him from clay.”
38|77|God commanded, “Then get out of Paradise, for you are truly cursed
38|78|And surely upon you is My condemnation until the Day of Judgment.”
38|79|Satan appealed, “My Lord! Then delay my end until the Day of their resurrection.”
38|80|God said, “You will be delayed
38|81|until the appointed Day.”
38|82|Satan said, “By Your Glory! I will certainly mislead them all
38|83|except Your chosen servants among them.”
38|84|God concluded, “The truth is—and I ˹only˺ say the truth—
38|85|I will surely fill up Hell with you and whoever follows you from among them, all together.”
38|86|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “I do not ask you for any reward for this ˹Quran˺, nor do I pretend to be someone I am not
38|87|It is only a reminder to the whole world
38|88|And you will certainly know its truth before long.”
39|1|The revelation of this Book is from God—the Almighty, All-Wise
39|2|Indeed, We have sent down the Book to you ˹O Prophet˺ in truth, so worship God ˹alone˺, being sincerely devoted to Him
39|3|Indeed, sincere devotion is due ˹only˺ to God. As for those who take other lords besides Him, ˹saying,˺ “We worship them only so they may bring us closer to God,” surely God will judge between all regarding what they differed about. God certainly does not guide whoever persists in lying and disbelief
39|4|Had it been God’s Will to have offspring, He could have chosen whatever He willed of His creation. Glory be to Him! He is God—the One, the Supreme
39|5|He created the heavens and the earth for a purpose. He wraps the night around the day, and wraps the day around the night. And He has subjected the sun and the moon, each orbiting for an appointed term. He is truly the Almighty, Most Forgiving
39|6|He created you ˹all˺ from a single soul, then from it He made its mate. And He produced for you four pairs of cattle. He creates you in the wombs of your mothers ˹in stages˺, one development after another, in three layers of darkness. That is God—your Lord! All authority belongs to Him. There is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him. How can you then be turned away
39|7|If you disbelieve, then ˹know that˺ God is truly not in need of you, nor does He approve of disbelief from His servants. But if you become grateful ˹through faith˺, He will appreciate that from you. No soul burdened with sin will bear the burden of another. Then to your Lord is your return, and He will inform you of what you used to do. He certainly knows best what is ˹hidden˺ in the heart
39|8|When one is touched with hardship, they cry out to their Lord, turning to Him ˹alone˺. But as soon as He showers them with blessings from Him, they ˹totally˺ forget the One they had cried to earlier, and set up equals to God to mislead ˹others˺ from His Way. Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Enjoy your disbelief for a little while! You will certainly be one of the inmates of the Fire.”
39|9|˹Are they better˺ or those who worship ˹their Lord˺ devoutly in the hours of the night, prostrating and standing, fearing the Hereafter and hoping for the mercy of their Lord? Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Are those who know equal to those who do not know?” None will be mindful ˹of this˺ except people of reason
39|10|Say ˹O Prophet, that God says˺, “O My servants who believe! Be mindful of your Lord. Those who do good in this world will have a good reward. And God’s earth is spacious. Only those who endure patiently will be given their reward without limit.”
39|11|Say, “I am commanded to worship God, being sincerely devoted to Him ˹alone˺
39|12|And I am commanded to be the first of those who submit ˹to His Will˺.”
39|13|Say, “I truly fear—if I were to disobey my Lord—the torment of a tremendous Day.”
39|14|Say, “It is ˹only˺ God that I worship, being sincere in my devotion to Him
39|15|Worship then whatever ˹gods˺ you want instead of Him.” Say, “The ˹true˺ losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on Judgment Day. That is indeed the clearest loss.”
39|16|They will have layers of fire above and below them. That is what God warns His servants with. So fear Me, O My servants
39|17|And those who shun the worship of false gods, turning to God ˹alone˺, will have good news. So give good news to My servants ˹O Prophet˺—
39|18|those who listen to what is said and follow the best of it. These are the ones ˹rightly˺ guided by God, and these are ˹truly˺ the people of reason
39|19|What about those against whom the decree of torment has been justified? Is it you ˹O Prophet˺ who will then save those bound for the Fire
39|20|But those mindful of their Lord will have ˹elevated˺ mansions, built one above the other, under which rivers flow. ˹That is˺ the promise of God. ˹And˺ God never fails in ˹His˺ promise
39|21|Do you not see that God sends down rain from the sky—channelling it through streams in the earth—then produces with it crops of various colours, then they dry up and you see them wither, and then He reduces them to chaff? Surely in this is a reminder for people of reason
39|22|Can ˹the misguided be like˺ those whose hearts God has opened to Islam, so they are enlightened by their Lord? So woe to those whose hearts are hardened at the remembrance of God! It is they who are clearly astray
39|23|˹It is˺ God ˹Who˺ has sent down the best message—a Book of perfect consistency and repeated lessons—which causes the skin ˹and hearts˺ of those who fear their Lord to tremble, then their skin and hearts soften at the mention of ˹the mercy of˺ God. That is the guidance of God, through which He guides whoever He wills. But whoever God leaves to stray will be left with no guide
39|24|Are those who will only have their ˹bare˺ faces to shield themselves from the awful torment on Judgment Day ˹better than those in Paradise˺? It will ˹then˺ be said to the wrongdoers: “Reap what you sowed!”
39|25|Those before them ˹also˺ rejected ˹the truth˺, then the torment came upon them from where they least expected
39|26|So God made them taste humiliation in this worldly life, but far worse is the punishment of the Hereafter, if only they knew
39|27|We have certainly set forth every ˹kind of˺ lesson for people in this Quran, so perhaps they will be mindful
39|28|˹It is˺ a Quran ˹revealed˺ in Arabic without any crookedness, so perhaps they will be conscious ˹of God˺
39|29|God sets forth the parable of a slave owned by several quarrelsome masters, and a slave owned by only one master. Are they equal in condition? Praise be to God! In fact, most of them do not know
39|30|You ˹O Prophet˺ will certainly die, and they will die too
39|31|Then on the Day of Judgment you will ˹all settle your˺ dispute before your Lord
39|32|Who then does more wrong than those who lie about God and reject the truth after it has reached them? Is Hell not a ˹fitting˺ home for the disbelievers
39|33|And the one who has brought the truth and those who embrace it—it is they who are the righteous
39|34|They will have whatever they desire with their Lord. That is the reward of the good-doers
39|35|As such, God will absolve them of ˹even˺ the worst of what they did and reward them according to the best of what they used to do
39|36|Is God not sufficient for His servant? Yet they threaten you with other ˹powerless˺ gods besides Him! Whoever God leaves to stray will be left with no guide
39|37|And whoever God guides, none can lead astray. Is God not Almighty, capable of punishment
39|38|If you ask them ˹O Prophet˺ who created the heavens and the earth, they will certainly say, “God!” Ask ˹them˺, “Consider then whatever ˹idols˺ you invoke besides God: if it was God’s Will to harm me, could they undo that harm? Or if He willed ˹some˺ mercy for me, could they withhold His mercy?” Say, “God is sufficient for me. In Him ˹alone˺ the faithful put their trust.”
39|39|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “O my people! Persist in your ways, for I ˹too˺ will persist in mine. You will soon come to know
39|40|who will be visited by a humiliating torment ˹in this life˺ and overwhelmed by an everlasting punishment ˹in the next˺.”
39|41|Surely We have revealed to you the Book ˹O Prophet˺ with the truth for humanity. So whoever chooses to be guided, it is for their own good. And whoever chooses to stray, it is only to their own loss. You are not a keeper over them
39|42|˹It is˺ God ˹Who˺ calls back the souls ˹of people˺ upon their death as well as ˹the souls˺ of the living during their sleep. Then He keeps those for whom He has ordained death, and releases the others until ˹their˺ appointed time. Surely in this are signs for people who reflect
39|43|Or have they taken others besides God as intercessors? Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “˹Would they do so,˺ even though those ˹idols˺ have neither authority nor intelligence?”
39|44|Say, “All intercession belongs to God ˹alone˺. To Him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. Then to Him you will ˹all˺ be returned.”
39|45|Yet when God alone is mentioned, the hearts of those who disbelieve in the Hereafter are filled with disgust. But as soon as those ˹gods˺ other than Him are mentioned, they are filled with joy
39|46|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “O God—Originator of the heavens and the earth, Knower of the seen and unseen! You will judge between Your servants regarding their differences.”
39|47|Even if the wrongdoers were to possess everything in the world twice over, they would certainly offer it to ransom themselves from the horrible punishment on Judgment Day, for they will see from God what they had never expected
39|48|And the evil ˹consequences˺ of their deeds will unfold before them, and they will be overwhelmed by what they used to ridicule
39|49|When one is touched with hardship, they cry out to Us ˹alone˺. Then when We shower Our blessings upon them, they say, “I have been granted all this only because of ˹my˺ knowledge.” Not at all! It is ˹no more than˺ a test. But most of them do not know
39|50|The same had already been said by those ˹destroyed˺ before them, but their ˹worldly˺ gains were of no benefit to them
39|51|So the evil ˹consequences˺ of their deeds overtook them. And the wrongdoers among these ˹pagans˺ will be overtaken by the evil ˹consequences˺ of their deeds. And they will have no escape
39|52|Do they not know that God gives abundant or limited provisions to whoever He wills? Surely in this are signs for people who believe
39|53|Say, ˹O Prophet, that God says,˺ “O My servants who have exceeded the limits against their souls! Do not lose hope in God’s mercy, for God certainly forgives all sins. He is indeed the All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
39|54|Turn to your Lord ˹in repentance˺, and ˹fully˺ submit to Him before the punishment reaches you, ˹for˺ then you will not be helped
39|55|Follow ˹the Quran,˺ the best of what has been revealed to you from your Lord, before the punishment takes you by surprise while you are unaware
39|56|so that no ˹sinful˺ soul will say ˹on Judgment Day˺, ‘Woe to me for neglecting ˹my duties towards˺ God, while ridiculing ˹the truth˺.’
39|57|Or ˹a soul will˺ say, ‘If only God had guided me, I would have certainly been one of the righteous.’
39|58|Or say, upon seeing the torment, ‘If only I had a second chance, I would have been one of the good-doers.’
39|59|Not at all! My revelations had already come to you, but you rejected them, acted arrogantly, and were one of the disbelievers.”
39|60|On the Day of Judgment you will see those who lied about God with their faces gloomy. Is Hell not a ˹fitting˺ home for the arrogant
39|61|And God will deliver those who were mindful ˹of Him˺ to their place of ˹ultimate˺ triumph. No evil will touch them, nor will they grieve
39|62|God is the Creator of all things, and He is the Maintainer of everything
39|63|To Him belong the keys ˹of the treasuries˺ of the heavens and the earth. As for those who rejected the signs of God, it is they who will be the ˹true˺ losers
39|64|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Are you urging me to worship ˹anyone˺ other than God, O ignorant ones?”
39|65|It has already been revealed to you—and to those ˹prophets˺ before you—that if you associate others ˹with God˺, your deeds will certainly be void and you will truly be one of the losers
39|66|Rather, worship God ˹alone˺ and be one of the grateful
39|67|They have not shown God His proper reverence—when on the Day of Judgment the ˹whole˺ earth will be in His Grip, and the heavens will be rolled up in His Right Hand. Glorified and Exalted is He above what they associate ˹with Him˺
39|68|The Trumpet will be blown and all those in the heavens and all those on the earth will fall dead, except those God wills ˹to spare˺. Then it will be blown again and they will rise up at once, looking on ˹in anticipation˺
39|69|The earth will shine with the light of its Lord, the record ˹of deeds˺ will be laid ˹open˺, the prophets and the witnesses will be brought forward—and judgment will be passed on all with fairness. None will be wronged
39|70|Every soul will be paid in full for its deeds, for God knows best what they have done
39|71|Those who disbelieved will be driven to Hell in ˹successive˺ groups. When they arrive there, its gates will be opened and its keepers will ask them: “Did messengers not come to you from among yourselves, reciting to you the revelations of your Lord and warning you of the coming of this Day of yours?” The disbelievers will cry, “Yes ˹indeed˺! But the decree of torment has come to pass against the disbelievers.”
39|72|It will be said to them, “Enter the gates of Hell, to stay there forever.” What an evil home for the arrogant
39|73|And those who were mindful of their Lord will be led to Paradise in ˹successive˺ groups. When they arrive at its ˹already˺ open gates, its keepers will say, “Peace be upon you! You have done well, so come in, to stay forever.”
39|74|The righteous will say, “Praise be to God Who has fulfilled His promise to us, and made us inherit the ˹everlasting˺ land to settle in Paradise wherever we please.” How excellent is the reward of those who work ˹righteousness˺
39|75|You will see the angels all around the Throne, glorifying the praises of their Lord, for judgment will have been passed on all with fairness. And it will be said, “Praise be to God—Lord of all worlds!”
40|1|Ḥâ-Mĩm
40|2|The revelation of this Book is from God—the Almighty, All-Knowing
40|3|the Forgiver of sin and Accepter of repentance, the Severe in punishment, and Infinite in bounty. There is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him. To Him ˹alone˺ is the final return
40|4|None disputes the signs of God except the disbelievers, so do not be deceived by their prosperity throughout the land
40|5|Before them, the people of Noah denied ˹the truth˺, as did ˹other˺ enemy forces afterwards. Every community plotted against its prophet to seize him, and argued in falsehood, ˹hoping˺ to discredit the truth with it. So I seized them. And how ˹horrible˺ was My punishment
40|6|And so your Lord’s decree has been proven true against the disbelievers—that they will be the inmates of the Fire
40|7|Those ˹angels˺ who carry the Throne and those around it glorify the praises of their Lord, have faith in Him, and seek forgiveness for the believers, ˹praying:˺ “Our Lord! You encompass everything in ˹Your˺ mercy and knowledge. So forgive those who repent and follow Your Way, and protect them from the torment of the Hellfire
40|8|Our Lord! Admit them into the Gardens of Eternity which You have promised them, along with the righteous among their parents, spouses, and descendants. You ˹alone˺ are truly the Almighty, All-Wise
40|9|And protect them from ˹the consequences of their˺ evil deeds. For whoever You protect from the evil of their deeds on that Day will have been shown Your mercy. That is ˹truly˺ the ultimate triumph.”
40|10|Indeed, it will be announced to the disbelievers, “God’s contempt for you—as you disbelieved when invited to belief—was far worse than your contempt for one another ˹Today˺.”
40|11|They will plead, “Our Lord! You made us lifeless twice, and gave us life twice. Now we confess our sins. So is there any way out?”
40|12|˹They will be told,˺ “˹No!˺ This is because when God alone was invoked, you ˹staunchly˺ disbelieved. But when others were associated with Him ˹in worship˺, you ˹readily˺ believed. So ˹Today˺ judgment belongs to God ˹alone˺—the Most High, All-Great.”
40|13|He is the One Who shows you His signs and sends down ˹rain as˺ a provision for you from the sky. ˹But˺ none will be mindful except those who turn ˹to Him˺
40|14|So call upon God with sincere devotion, even to the dismay of the disbelievers
40|15|˹He is˺ Highly Exalted in rank, Lord of the Throne. He sends down the revelation by His command to whoever He wills of His servants to warn ˹all˺ of the Day of Meeting—
40|16|the Day all will appear ˹before God˺. Nothing about them will be hidden from Him. ˹He will ask,˺ “Who does all authority belong to this Day? To God—the One, the Supreme
40|17|Today every soul will be rewarded for what it has done. No injustice Today! Surely God is swift in reckoning.”
40|18|Warn them ˹O Prophet˺ of the approaching Day when the hearts will jump into the throats, suppressing distress. The wrongdoers will have neither a close friend nor intercessor to be heard
40|19|God ˹even˺ knows the sly glances of the eyes and whatever the hearts conceal
40|20|And God judges with the truth, while those ˹idols˺ they invoke besides Him cannot judge at all. Indeed, God ˹alone˺ is the All-Hearing, All-Seeing
40|21|Have they not travelled throughout the land to see what was the end of those ˹destroyed˺ before them? They were far superior in might and ˹richer in˺ monuments throughout the land. But God seized them for their sins, and they had no protector from God
40|22|That was because their messengers used to come to them with clear proofs, but they persisted in disbelief. So God seized them. Surely He is All-Powerful, severe in punishment
40|23|Indeed, We sent Moses with Our signs and compelling proof
40|24|to Pharaoh, Hamân, and Korah. But they responded: “Magician! Total liar!”
40|25|Then, when he came to them with the truth from Us, they said, “Kill the sons of those who believe with him and keep their women.” But the plotting of the disbelievers was only in vain
40|26|And Pharaoh said, “Let me kill Moses, and let him call upon his Lord! I truly fear that he may change your traditions or cause mischief in the land.”
40|27|Moses replied, “I seek refuge in my Lord and your Lord from every arrogant person who does not believe in the Day of Reckoning.”
40|28|A believing man from Pharaoh’s people, who was hiding his faith, argued, “Will you kill a man ˹only˺ for saying: ‘My Lord is God,’ while he has in fact come to you with clear proofs from your Lord? If he is a liar, it will be to his own loss. But if he is truthful, then you will be afflicted with some of what he is threatening you with. Surely God does not guide whoever is a transgressor, a total liar
40|29|O my people! Authority belongs to you today, reigning supreme in the land. But who would help us against the torment of God, if it were to befall us?” Pharaoh assured ˹his people˺, “I am telling you only what I believe, and I am leading you only to the way of guidance.”
40|30|And the man who believed cautioned, “O my people! I truly fear for you the doom of ˹earlier˺ enemy forces—
40|31|like the fate of the people of Noah, ’Ȃd, Thamûd, and those after them. For God would never will to wrong ˹His˺ servants
40|32|O my people! I truly fear for you the Day all will be crying out ˹to each other˺—
40|33|the Day you will ˹try in vain to˺ turn your backs and run away, with no one to protect you from God. And whoever God leaves to stray will be left with no guide
40|34|Joseph already came to you earlier with clear proofs, yet you never ceased to doubt what he came to you with. When he died you said, ‘God will never send a messenger after him.’ This is how God leaves every transgressor and doubter to stray—
40|35|those who dispute God’s signs with no proof given to them. How despicable is that for God and the believers! This is how God seals the heart of every arrogant tyrant.”
40|36|Pharaoh ordered, “O Hamân! Build me a high tower so I may reach the pathways
40|37|leading up to the heavens and look for the God of Moses, although I am sure he is a liar.” And so Pharaoh’s evil deeds were made so appealing to him that he was hindered from the ˹Right˺ Way. But the plotting of Pharaoh was only in vain
40|38|And the man who believed urged, “O my people! Follow me, ˹and˺ I will lead you to the Way of Guidance
40|39|O my people! This worldly life is only ˹a fleeting˺ enjoyment, whereas the Hereafter is truly the home of settlement
40|40|Whoever does an evil deed will only be paid back with its equivalent. And whoever does good, whether male or female, and is a believer, they will enter Paradise, where they will be provided for without limit
40|41|O my people! How is it that I invite you to salvation, while you invite me to the Fire
40|42|You invite me to disbelieve in God and associate with Him what I have no knowledge of, while I invite you to the Almighty, Most Forgiving
40|43|There is no doubt that whatever ˹idols˺ you invite me to ˹worship˺ are not worthy to be invoked either in this world or the Hereafter. ˹Undoubtedly,˺ our return is to God, and the transgressors will be the inmates of the Fire
40|44|You will remember what I say to you, and I entrust my affairs to God. Surely God is All-Seeing of all ˹His˺ servants.”
40|45|So God protected him from the evil of their schemes. And Pharaoh’s people were overwhelmed by an evil punishment
40|46|they are exposed to the Fire ˹in their graves˺ morning and evening. And on the Day the Hour will be established ˹it will be said˺, “Admit Pharaoh’s people into the harshest punishment ˹of Hell˺.”
40|47|˹Consider the Day˺ when they will dispute in the Fire, and the lowly ˹followers˺ will appeal to the arrogant ˹leaders˺, “We were your ˹dedicated˺ followers, will you then shield us from a portion of the Fire?”
40|48|The arrogant will say, “We are all in it! ˹For˺ God has already passed judgment over ˹His˺ servants.”
40|49|And those in the Fire will cry out to the keepers of Hell, “Pray to your Lord to lighten the torment for us ˹even˺ for one day!”
40|50|The keepers will reply, “Did your messengers not ˹constantly˺ come to you with clear proofs?” They will say, “Yes ˹they did˺.” The keepers will say, “Then pray! Though the prayer of the disbelievers is only in vain.”
40|51|We certainly help Our messengers and the believers, ˹both˺ in this worldly life and on the Day the witnesses will stand forth ˹for testimony˺—
40|52|the Day the wrongdoers’ excuses will be of no benefit to them. They will be condemned, and will have the worst outcome
40|53|And indeed, We gave Moses ˹true˺ guidance, and made the Children of Israel inherit the Scripture—
40|54|a guide and a reminder to people of reason
40|55|So be patient ˹O Prophet˺, ˹for˺ God’s promise is certainly true. Seek forgiveness for your shortcomings. And glorify the praises of your Lord morning and evening
40|56|Surely those who dispute God’s signs—with no proof given to them—have nothing in their hearts but greed for dominance, which they will never attain. So seek refuge in God. Indeed, He alone is the All-Hearing, All-Seeing
40|57|The creation of the heavens and the earth is certainly greater than the re-creation of humankind, but most people do not know
40|58|Those blind ˹to the truth˺ and those who can see are not equal, nor are those who believe and do good ˹equal˺ to those who do evil. Yet you are hardly mindful
40|59|The Hour is certainly coming, there is no doubt about it. But most people do not believe
40|60|Your Lord has proclaimed, “Call upon Me, I will respond to you. Surely those who are too proud to worship Me will enter Hell, fully humbled.”
40|61|It is God Who has made the night for you to rest in and the day bright. Surely God is ever Bountiful to humanity, but most people are ungrateful
40|62|That is God, your Lord, the Creator of all things. There is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him. How can you then be deluded ˹from the truth˺
40|63|This is how those who used to reject God’s signs were ˹also˺ deluded
40|64|It is God Who made the earth a place of settlement for you and the sky a canopy. He shaped you ˹in the womb˺, perfecting your form. And He has provided you with what is good and lawful. That is God—your Lord. So Blessed is God, Lord of all worlds
40|65|He is the Ever-Living. There is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him. So call upon Him with sincere devotion, ˹saying,˺ “All praise is for God—Lord of all worlds.”
40|66|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “I have been forbidden to worship those ˹idols˺ you worship besides God, since clear proofs have come to me from my Lord. And I have been commanded to ˹fully˺ submit to the Lord of all worlds.”
40|67|He is the One Who created you from dust, then from a sperm-drop, then ˹developed you into˺ a clinging clot ˹of blood˺, then He brings you forth as infants, so that you may reach your prime, and become old—though some of you ˹may˺ die sooner—reaching an appointed time, so perhaps you may understand ˹God’s power˺
40|68|He is the One Who gives life and causes death. When He decrees a matter, He simply tells it, “Be!” And it is
40|69|Have you not seen how those who dispute God’s signs are turned away
40|70|˹They are˺ the ones who reject this Book and all ˹scriptures˺ We sent Our messengers with. So they will know ˹the consequences˺
40|71|when shackles will be around their necks and chains ˹on their legs˺. They will be dragged
40|72|through boiling water, then burned in the Fire ˹as fuel˺
40|73|Then they will be asked, “Where are those ˹idols˺ you used to associate
40|74|with God?” They will cry, “They have ˹all˺ failed us. In fact, we did not invoke anything ˹real˺ before.” This is how God leaves the disbelievers to stray
40|75|˹They will be told,˺ “This ˹punishment˺ is for being prideful on earth unjustly and for acting arrogantly
40|76|Enter the gates of Hell, to stay there forever. What an evil home for the arrogant!”
40|77|So be patient ˹O Prophet˺. Surely God’s promise is true. Whether We show you some of what We threaten them with, or cause you to die ˹before that˺, to Us they will ˹all˺ be returned
40|78|We already sent messengers before you. We have told you the stories of some of them, while others We have not. It was not for any messenger to bring a sign without God’s permission. But when God’s decree comes, judgment will be passed with fairness, and the people of falsehood will then be in ˹total˺ loss
40|79|It is God Who made cattle for you so that you may ride some and eat others
40|80|Also, you find in them ˹other˺ benefits. And by means of them you may reach destinations you desire. And you are carried upon ˹some of˺ them and upon ships
40|81|And He shows you His signs. Now which of God’s signs will you deny
40|82|Have they not travelled throughout the land to see what was the end of those who were ˹destroyed˺ before them? They were far superior in might and ˹richer in˺ monuments throughout the land, but their ˹worldly˺ gains were of no benefit to them
40|83|When their messengers came to them with clear proofs, they were prideful in whatever ˹worldly˺ knowledge they had, and were ˹ultimately˺ overwhelmed by what they used to ridicule
40|84|When they saw Our punishment, they cried, “˹Now˺ we believe in God alone and reject what we had been associating with Him!”
40|85|But their faith was of no benefit to them when they saw Our torment. This has ˹always˺ been God’s way ˹of dealing˺ with His ˹wicked˺ servants. Then and there the disbelievers were in ˹total˺ loss
41|1|Ḥâ-Mĩm
41|2|˹This is˺ a revelation from the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful
41|3|˹It is˺ a Book whose verses are perfectly explained—a Quran in Arabic for people who know
41|4|delivering good news and warning. Yet most of them turn away, so they do not hear
41|5|They say, “Our hearts are veiled against what you are calling us to, there is deafness in our ears, and there is a barrier between us and you. So do ˹whatever you want˺ and so shall we!”
41|6|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “I am only a man like you, ˹but˺ it has been revealed to me that your God is only One God. So take the Straight Way towards Him, and seek His forgiveness. And woe to the polytheists—
41|7|those who do not pay alms-tax and are in denial of the Hereafter
41|8|˹But˺ those who believe and do good will certainly have a never-ending reward
41|9|Ask ˹them, O Prophet˺, “How can you disbelieve in the One Who created the earth in two Days? And how can you set up equals with Him? That is the Lord of all worlds
41|10|He placed on the earth firm mountains, standing high, showered His blessings upon it, and ordained ˹all˺ its means of sustenance—totaling four Days exactly—for all who ask
41|11|Then He turned towards the heaven when it was ˹still like˺ smoke, saying to it and to the earth, ‘Submit, willingly or unwillingly.’ They both responded, ‘We submit willingly.’
41|12|So He formed the heaven into seven heavens in two Days, assigning to each its mandate. And We adorned the lowest heaven with ˹stars like˺ lamps ˹for beauty˺ and for protection. That is the design of the Almighty, All-Knowing.”
41|13|If they turn away, then say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “I warn you of a ˹mighty˺ blast, like the one that befell ’Ȃd and Thamûd.”
41|14|The messengers had come to them from all angles, ˹proclaiming,˺ “Worship none but God.” They responded, “Had our Lord willed, He could have easily sent down angels ˹instead˺. So we totally reject what you have been sent with.”
41|15|As for ’Ȃd, they acted arrogantly throughout the land with no right, boasting, “Who is superior to us in might?” Did they not see that God ˹Himself˺, Who created them, was far superior to them in might? Still they persisted in denying Our signs
41|16|So We sent against them a furious wind, for ˹several˺ miserable days, to make them taste a humiliating punishment in this worldly life. But far more humiliating will be the punishment of the Hereafter. And they will not be helped
41|17|As for Thamûd, We showed them guidance, but they preferred blindness over guidance. So the blast of a disgracing punishment overtook them for what they used to commit
41|18|And We delivered those who were faithful and were mindful ˹of God˺
41|19|˹Consider˺ the Day ˹when˺ the enemies of God will be gathered for the Fire, all driven in ranks
41|20|When they reach it, their ears, eyes, and skin will testify against what they used to do
41|21|They will ask their skin ˹furiously˺, “Why have you testified against us?” It will say, “We have been made to speak by God, Who causes all things to speak. He ˹is the One Who˺ created you the first time, and to Him you were bound to return
41|22|You did not ˹bother to˺ hide yourselves from your ears, eyes, and skin to prevent them from testifying against you. Rather, you assumed that God did not know much of what you used to do
41|23|It was that ˹false˺ assumption you entertained about your Lord that has brought about your doom, so you have become losers.”
41|24|Even if they endure patiently, the Fire will ˹always˺ be their home. And if they ˹beg to˺ appease ˹their Lord˺, they will never be allowed to
41|25|We placed at their disposal ˹evil˺ associates who made their past and future ˹misdeeds˺ appealing to them. ˹So˺ the fate of earlier communities of jinn and humans has been justified against them ˹as well˺, ˹for˺ they were truly losers
41|26|The disbelievers advised ˹one another˺, “Do not listen to this Quran but drown it out so that you may prevail.”
41|27|So We will certainly make the disbelievers taste a severe punishment, and We will surely repay them according to the worst of their deeds
41|28|That is the reward of God’s enemies: the Fire, which will be their eternal home—a ˹fitting˺ reward for their denial of Our revelations
41|29|The disbelievers will ˹then˺ cry, “Our Lord! Show us those jinn and humans who led us astray: we will put them under our feet so that they will be among the lowest ˹in Hell˺.”
41|30|Surely those who say, “Our Lord is God,” and then remain steadfast, the angels descend upon them, ˹saying,˺ “Do not fear, nor grieve. Rather, rejoice in the good news of Paradise, which you have been promised
41|31|We are your supporters in this worldly life and in the Hereafter. There you will have whatever your souls desire, and there you will have whatever you ask for
41|32|an accommodation from the All-Forgiving, Most Merciful ˹Lord˺.”
41|33|And whose words are better than someone who calls ˹others˺ to God, does good, and says, “I am truly one of those who submit.”
41|34|Good and evil cannot be equal. Respond ˹to evil˺ with what is best, then the one you are in a feud with will be like a close friend
41|35|But this cannot be attained except by those who are patient and who are truly fortunate
41|36|And if you are tempted by Satan, then seek refuge with God. Indeed, He ˹alone˺ is the All-Hearing, All-Knowing
41|37|Among His signs are the day and the night, the sun and the moon. Do not prostrate to the sun or the moon, but prostrate to God, Who created them ˹all˺, if you ˹truly˺ worship Him ˹alone˺
41|38|But if the pagans are too proud, then ˹let them know that˺ those ˹angels˺ nearest to your Lord glorify Him day and night, and never grow weary
41|39|And among His signs is that you see the earth devoid of life, but as soon as We send down rain upon it, it begins to stir ˹to life˺ and swell. Indeed, the One Who revives it can easily revive the dead. He is certainly Most Capable of everything
41|40|Indeed, those who abuse Our revelations are not hidden from Us. Who is better: the one who will be cast into the Fire or the one who will be secure on Judgment Day? Do whatever you want. He is certainly All-Seeing of what you do
41|41|Indeed, those who deny the Reminder after it has come to them ˹are doomed˺, for it is truly a mighty Book
41|42|It cannot be proven false from any angle. ˹It is˺ a revelation from the ˹One Who is˺ All-Wise, Praiseworthy
41|43|˹O Prophet!˺ Nothing is said to you ˹by the deniers˺ except what was already said to the messengers before you. Surely your Lord is ˹the Lord˺ of forgiveness and painful punishment
41|44|Had We revealed it as a non-Arabic Quran, they would have certainly argued, “If only its verses were made clear ˹in our language˺. What! A non-Arabic revelation for an Arab audience!” Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “It is a guide and a healing to the believers. As for those who disbelieve, there is deafness in their ears and blindness to it ˹in their hearts˺. It is as if they are being called from a faraway place.”
41|45|Indeed, We had given Moses the Scripture, but differences arose regarding it. Had it not been for a prior decree from your Lord, their differences would have been settled ˹at once˺. They are truly in alarming doubt about it
41|46|Whoever does good, it is to their own benefit. And whoever does evil, it is to their own loss. Your Lord is never unjust to ˹His˺ creation
41|47|With Him ˹alone˺ is the knowledge of the Hour. No fruit comes out of its husk, nor does a female conceive or deliver without His knowledge. And ˹consider˺ the Day He will call to them, “Where are My ˹so-called˺ associate-gods?” They will cry, “We declare before you that none of us testifies to that ˹any longer˺.”
41|48|Whatever ˹idols˺ they used to invoke besides God will fail them. And they will realize that they will have no escape
41|49|One never tires of praying for good. And if touched with evil, they become desperate and hopeless
41|50|And if We let them taste a mercy from Us after being touched with adversity, they will certainly say, “This is what I deserve. I do not think the Hour will ˹ever˺ come. And if in fact I am returned to my Lord, the finest reward with Him will definitely be mine.” But We will surely inform the disbelievers of what they used to do. And We will certainly make them taste a harsh torment
41|51|When We show favour to someone, they turn away, acting arrogantly. And when touched with evil, they make endless prayers ˹for good˺
41|52|Ask ˹them, O Prophet˺, “Imagine if this ˹Quran˺ is ˹truly˺ from God and you deny it: who can be more astray than those who have gone too far in opposition ˹to the truth˺?”
41|53|We will show them Our signs in the universe and within themselves until it becomes clear to them that this ˹Quran˺ is the truth. Is it not enough that your Lord is a Witness over all things
41|54|They are truly in doubt of the meeting with their Lord! ˹But˺ He is indeed Fully Aware of everything
42|1|Ḥâ-Mĩm
42|2|’Aĩn-Sĩn-Qãf
42|3|And so you ˹O Prophet˺ are sent revelation, just like those before you, by God—the Almighty, All-Wise
42|4|To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. And He is the Most High, the Greatest
42|5|The heavens nearly burst, one above the other, ˹in awe of Him˺. And the angels glorify the praises of their Lord, and seek forgiveness for those on earth. Surely God alone is the All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
42|6|As for those who take other protectors besides Him, God is Watchful over them. And you ˹O Prophet˺ are not a keeper over them
42|7|And so We have revealed to you a Quran in Arabic, so you may warn the Mother of Cities and everyone around it, and warn of the Day of Gathering—about which there is no doubt—˹when˺ a group will be in Paradise and another in the Blaze
42|8|Had God willed, He could have easily made all ˹humanity˺ into a single community ˹of believers˺. But He admits into His mercy whoever He wills. And the wrongdoers will have no protector or helper
42|9|How can they take protectors besides Him? God alone is the Protector. He ˹alone˺ gives life to the dead. And He ˹alone˺ is Most Capable of everything
42|10|˹Say to the believers, O Prophet,˺ “Whatever you may differ about, its judgment rests with God. That is God—my Lord. In Him I put my trust, and to Him I ˹always˺ turn.”
42|11|˹He is˺ the Originator of the heavens and the earth. He has made for you spouses from among yourselves, and ˹made˺ mates for cattle ˹as well˺—multiplying you ˹both˺. There is nothing like Him, for He ˹alone˺ is the All-Hearing, All-Seeing
42|12|To Him belong the keys ˹of the treasuries˺ of the heavens and the earth. He gives abundant or limited provisions to whoever He wills. Indeed, He has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all things
42|13|He has ordained for you ˹believers˺ the Way which He decreed for Noah, and what We have revealed to you ˹O Prophet˺ and what We decreed for Abraham, Moses, and Jesus, ˹commanding:˺ “Uphold the faith, and make no divisions in it.” What you call the polytheists to is unbearable for them. God chooses for Himself whoever He wills, and guides to Himself whoever turns ˹to Him˺
42|14|They did not split ˹into sects˺ out of mutual envy until knowledge came to them. Had it not been for a prior decree from your Lord for an appointed term, the matter would have certainly been settled between them ˹at once˺. And surely those who were made to inherit the Scripture after them are truly in alarming doubt about this ˹Quran˺
42|15|Because of that, you ˹O Prophet˺ will invite ˹all˺. Be steadfast as you are commanded, and do not follow their desires. And say, “I believe in every Scripture God has revealed. And I am commanded to judge fairly among you. God is our Lord and your Lord. We will be accountable for our deeds and you for yours. There is no ˹need for˺ contention between us. God will gather us together ˹for judgment˺. And to Him is the final return.”
42|16|As for those who dispute about God after He is ˹already˺ acknowledged ˹by many˺, their argument is futile in the sight of their Lord. Upon them is wrath, and they will suffer a severe punishment
42|17|It is God Who has revealed the Book with the truth and the balance ˹of justice˺. You never know, perhaps the Hour is near
42|18|Those who disbelieve in it ˹ask to˺ hasten it ˹mockingly˺. But the believers are fearful of it, knowing that it is the truth. Surely those who dispute about the Hour have gone far astray
42|19|God is Ever Kind to His servants. He provides ˹abundantly˺ to whoever He wills. And He is the All-Powerful, Almighty
42|20|Whoever desires the harvest of the Hereafter, We will increase their harvest. And whoever desires ˹only˺ the harvest of this world, We will give them some of it, but they will have no share in the Hereafter
42|21|Or do they have associate-gods who have ordained for them some ˹polytheistic˺ beliefs, which God has not authorized? Had it not been for ˹prior˺ decree on Judgment, the matter would have certainly been settled between them ˹at once˺. And surely the wrongdoers will suffer a painful punishment
42|22|You will see the wrongdoers fearful ˹of the punishment˺ for what they committed but it will be inevitable for them, whereas those who believe and do good will be in the lush Gardens of Paradise. They will have whatever they desire from their Lord. That is ˹truly˺ the greatest bounty
42|23|That ˹reward˺ is the good news which God gives to His servants who believe and do good. Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “I do not ask you for a reward for this ˹message˺—only honour for ˹our˺ kinship.” Whoever earns a good deed, We will increase it in goodness for them. Surely God is All-Forgiving, Most Appreciative
42|24|Or do they say, “He has fabricated a lie about God!”? ˹If you had,˺ God would have sealed your heart, if He willed. And God wipes out falsehood and establishes the truth by His Words. He certainly knows best what is ˹hidden˺ in the heart
42|25|He is the One Who accepts repentance from His servants and pardons ˹their˺ sins. And He knows whatever you do
42|26|He responds to those who believe and do good, and increases their reward out of His grace. As for the disbelievers, they will suffer a severe punishment
42|27|Had God given abundant provisions to ˹all˺ His servants, they would have certainly transgressed throughout the land. But He sends down whatever He wills in perfect measure. He is truly All-Aware, All-Seeing of His servants
42|28|He is the One Who sends down rain after people have given up hope, spreading out His mercy. He is the Guardian, the Praiseworthy
42|29|And among His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and all living beings He dispersed throughout both. And He is Most Capable of bringing all together whenever He wills
42|30|Whatever affliction befalls you is because of what your own hands have committed. And He pardons much
42|31|You can never escape ˹Him˺ on earth, nor do you have any protector or helper besides God
42|32|And among His signs are the ships like mountains ˹sailing˺ in the sea
42|33|If He wills, He can calm the wind, leaving the ships motionless on the water. Surely in this are signs for whoever is steadfast, grateful
42|34|Or He can wreck the ships for what the people have committed—though He forgives much—
42|35|so those who dispute about Our signs may know that they have no refuge
42|36|Whatever ˹pleasure˺ you have been given is ˹no more than a fleeting˺ enjoyment of this worldly life. But what is with God is far better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their Lord
42|37|who avoid major sins and shameful deeds, and forgive when angered
42|38|who respond to their Lord, establish prayer, conduct their affairs by mutual consultation, and donate from what We have provided for them
42|39|and who enforce justice when wronged
42|40|The reward of an evil deed is its equivalent. But whoever pardons and seeks reconciliation, then their reward is with God. He certainly does not like the wrongdoers
42|41|There is no blame on those who enforce justice after being wronged
42|42|Blame is only on those who wrong people and transgress in the land unjustly. It is they who will suffer a painful punishment
42|43|And whoever endures patiently and forgives—surely this is a resolve to aspire to
42|44|And whoever God leaves to stray will have no guide after Him. You will see the wrongdoers, when they face the torment, pleading, “Is there any way back ˹to the world˺?”
42|45|And you will see them exposed to the Fire, fully humbled out of disgrace, stealing glances ˹at it˺. And the believers will say, “The ˹true˺ losers are those who have lost themselves and their families on Judgment Day.” The wrongdoers will certainly be in everlasting torment
42|46|They will have no protectors to help them against God. And whoever God leaves to stray, for them there is no way
42|47|Respond to your Lord before the coming of a Day from God that cannot be averted. There will be no refuge for you then, nor ˹grounds for˺ denial ˹of sins˺
42|48|But if they turn away, We have not sent you ˹O Prophet˺ as a keeper over them. Your duty is only to deliver ˹the message˺. And indeed, when We let someone taste a mercy from Us, they become prideful ˹because˺ of it. But when afflicted with evil because of what their hands have done, then one becomes totally ungrateful
42|49|To God ˹alone˺ belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He creates whatever He wills. He blesses whoever He wills with daughters, and blesses whoever He wills with sons
42|50|or grants both, sons and daughters, ˹to whoever He wills˺, and leaves whoever He wills infertile. He is indeed All-Knowing, Most Capable
42|51|It is not ˹possible˺ for a human being to have God communicate with them, except through inspiration, or from behind a veil, or by sending a messenger-angel to reveal whatever He wills by His permission. He is surely Most High, All-Wise
42|52|And so We have sent to you ˹O Prophet˺ a revelation by Our command. You did not know of ˹this˺ Book and faith ˹before˺. But We have made it a light, by which We guide whoever We will of Our servants. And you are truly leading ˹all˺ to the Straight Path—
42|53|the Path of God, to Whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. Surely to God all matters will return ˹for judgment˺
43|1|Ḥâ-Mĩm
43|2|By the clear Book
43|3|Certainly, We have made it a Quran in Arabic so perhaps you will understand
43|4|And indeed, it is—in the Master Record with Us—highly esteemed, rich in wisdom
43|5|Should We then turn the ˹Quranic˺ Reminder away from you ˹simply˺ because you have been a transgressing people
43|6|˹Imagine˺ how many prophets We sent to those ˹destroyed˺ before
43|7|But no prophet ever came to them without being mocked
43|8|So We destroyed those who were far mightier than these ˹Meccans˺. The examples of ˹their˺ predecessors have ˹already˺ been related
43|9|If you ask them ˹O Prophet˺ who created the heavens and the earth, they will certainly say, “The Almighty, All-Knowing did.”
43|10|˹He is the One˺ Who has laid out the earth for you, and set in it pathways for you so that you may find your way
43|11|And ˹He is the One˺ Who sends down rain from the sky in perfect measure, with which We give life to a lifeless land. And so will you be brought forth ˹from the grave˺
43|12|And ˹He is the One˺ Who created all ˹things in˺ pairs, and made for you ships and animals to ride
43|13|so that you may sit firmly on their backs, and remember your Lord’s blessings once you are settled on them, saying, “Glory be to the One Who has subjected these for us, for we could have never done so ˹on our own˺
43|14|And surely to our Lord we will ˹all˺ return.”
43|15|Still the pagans have made some of His creation out to be a part of Him. Indeed, humankind is clearly ungrateful
43|16|Has He taken ˹angels as His˺ daughters from what He created, and favoured you ˹O pagans˺ with sons
43|17|Whenever one of them is given the good news of what they attribute to the Most Compassionate, his face grows gloomy, as he suppresses his rage
43|18|˹Do they attribute to Him˺ those who are brought up in fineries and are not commanding in disputes
43|19|Still they have labelled the angels, who are servants of the Most Compassionate, as female. Did they witness their creation? Their statement will be recorded, and they will be questioned
43|20|And they argue, “Had the Most Compassionate willed, we would have never worshipped them.” They have no knowledge ˹in support˺ of this ˹claim˺. They do nothing but lie
43|21|Or have We given them a Book ˹for proof˺, before this ˹Quran˺, to which they are holding firm
43|22|In fact, they say, “We found our forefathers following a ˹particular˺ way, and we are following in their footsteps.”
43|23|Similarly, whenever We sent a warner to a society before you ˹O Prophet˺, its ˹spoiled˺ elite would say, “We found our forefathers following a ˹particular˺ way, and we are walking in their footsteps.”
43|24|Each ˹warner˺ asked, “Even if what I brought you is better guidance than what you found your forefathers practicing?” They replied, “We totally reject whatever you have been sent with.”
43|25|So We inflicted punishment upon them. See then what was the fate of the deniers
43|26|˹Remember, O Prophet˺ when Abraham declared to his father and his people, “I am totally free of whatever ˹gods˺ you worship
43|27|except the One Who originated me, and He will surely guide me.”
43|28|And he left this enduring declaration among his descendants, so they may ˹always˺ turn back ˹to God˺
43|29|In fact, I had allowed enjoyment for these ˹Meccans˺ and their forefathers, until the truth came to them along with a messenger making things clear
43|30|˹But˺ when the truth came to them, they said, “This is magic, and we totally reject it.”
43|31|And they exclaimed, “If only this Quran was revealed to a great man from ˹one of˺ the two cities!”
43|32|Is it they who distribute your Lord’s mercy? We ˹alone˺ have distributed their ˹very˺ livelihood among them in this worldly life and raised some of them in rank above others so that some may employ others in service. ˹But˺ your Lord’s mercy is far better than whatever ˹wealth˺ they amass
43|33|Were it not that people might ˹be tempted to˺ become one community ˹of disbelievers˺, We would have supplied the homes of ˹only˺ those who disbelieve in the Most Compassionate with silver roofs and ˹silver˺ stairways to ascend
43|34|as well as ˹silver˺ gates and thrones to recline on
43|35|and ornaments ˹of gold˺. Yet all this is no more than a ˹fleeting˺ enjoyment in this worldly life. ˹But˺ the Hereafter with your Lord is ˹only˺ for those mindful ˹of Him˺
43|36|And whoever turns a blind eye to the Reminder of the Most Compassionate, We place at the disposal of each a devilish one as their close associate
43|37|who will certainly hinder them from the ˹Right˺ Way while they think they are ˹rightly˺ guided
43|38|But when such a person comes to Us, one will say ˹to their associate˺, “I wish you were as distant from me as the east is from the west! What an evil associate ˹you were˺!”
43|39|˹It will be said to both,˺ “Since you all did wrong, sharing in the punishment will be of no benefit to you this Day.”
43|40|Can you make the deaf hear, or guide the blind or those clearly astray
43|41|Even if We take you away ˹from this world˺, We will surely inflict punishment upon them
43|42|Or if We show you what We threaten them with, We certainly have full power over them
43|43|So hold firmly to what has been revealed to you ˹O Prophet˺. You are truly on the Straight Path
43|44|Surely this ˹Quran˺ is a glory for you and your people. And you will ˹all˺ be questioned ˹about it˺
43|45|Ask ˹the followers of˺ the messengers that We already sent before you if We ˹ever˺ appointed ˹other˺ gods to be worshipped besides the Most Compassionate
43|46|Indeed, We sent Moses with Our signs to Pharaoh and his chiefs, and he said: “I am a messenger of the Lord of all worlds.”
43|47|But as soon as he came to them with Our signs, they laughed at them
43|48|although every sign We showed them was greater than the one before. Ultimately, We seized them with torments so that they might return ˹to the Right Path˺
43|49|˹Then˺ they pleaded, “O ˹mighty˺ magician! Pray to your Lord on our behalf, by virtue of the covenant He made with you. We will certainly accept guidance.”
43|50|But as soon as We removed the torments from them, they broke their promise
43|51|And Pharaoh called out to his people, boasting, “O my people! Am I not sovereign over Egypt as well as ˹all˺ these streams flowing at my feet? Can you not see
43|52|Am I not better than this nobody who can hardly express himself
43|53|Why then have no golden bracelets ˹of kingship˺ been granted to him or angels come with him as escorts!”
43|54|And so he fooled his people, and they obeyed him. They were truly a rebellious people
43|55|So when they enraged Us, We inflicted punishment upon them, drowning them all
43|56|And We made them an example and a lesson for those after them
43|57|When the son of Mary was cited as an example ˹in argument˺, your people ˹O Prophet˺ broke into ˹joyful˺ applause
43|58|They exclaimed, “Which is better: our gods or Jesus?” They cite him only to argue. In fact, they are a people prone to dispute
43|59|He was only a servant We showed favour to, and made as an example for the Children of Israel
43|60|Had We willed, We could have easily replaced you ˹all˺ with angels, succeeding one another on earth
43|61|And his ˹second˺ coming is truly a sign for the Hour. So have no doubt about it, and follow me. This is the Straight Path
43|62|And do not let Satan hinder you, ˹for˺ he is certainly your sworn enemy
43|63|When Jesus came with clear proofs, he declared, “I have come to you with wisdom, and to clarify to you some of what you differ about. So fear God, and obey me
43|64|Surely God ˹alone˺ is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him ˹alone˺. This is the Straight Path.”
43|65|Yet their ˹various˺ groups have differed among themselves ˹about him˺, so woe to the wrongdoers when they face the torment of a painful Day
43|66|Are they waiting for the Hour to take them by surprise when they least expect ˹it˺
43|67|Close friends will be enemies to one another on that Day, except the righteous
43|68|˹who will be told,˺ “O My servants! There is no fear for you Today, nor will you grieve—
43|69|˹those˺ who believed in Our signs and ˹fully˺ submitted ˹to Us˺
43|70|Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing.”
43|71|Golden trays and cups will be passed around to them. There will be whatever the souls desire and the eyes delight in. And you will be there forever
43|72|That is the Paradise which you will be awarded for what you used to do
43|73|There you will have abundant fruit to eat from
43|74|Indeed, the wicked will be in the torment of Hell forever
43|75|It will never be lightened for them, and there they will be overwhelmed with despair
43|76|We did not wrong them, but it was they who were the wrongdoers
43|77|They will cry, “O Mâlik! Let your Lord finish us off.” He will answer, “You are definitely here to stay.”
43|78|We certainly brought the truth to you, but most of you were resentful of the truth
43|79|Or have they mastered some ˹evil˺ plan? Then We ˹too˺ are surely planning
43|80|Or do they think that We do not hear their ˹evil˺ thoughts and secret talks? Yes ˹We do˺! And Our messenger-angels are in their presence, recording ˹it all˺
43|81|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “If the Most Compassionate ˹really˺ had offspring, I would be the first worshipper.”
43|82|Glorified is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of the Throne, far above what they claim
43|83|So let them indulge ˹in falsehood˺ and amuse ˹themselves˺ until they face their Day, which they have been warned of
43|84|It is He Who is ˹the only˺ God in the heavens and ˹the only˺ God on the earth. For He is the All-Wise, All-Knowing
43|85|And Blessed is the One to Whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and everything in between! With Him ˹alone˺ is the knowledge of the Hour. And to Him you will ˹all˺ be returned
43|86|˹But˺ those ˹objects of worship˺ they invoke besides Him have no power to intercede, except those who testify to the truth knowingly
43|87|If you ask them ˹O Prophet˺ who created them, they will certainly say, “God!” How can they then be deluded ˹from the truth˺
43|88|˹God is Aware of˺ the Prophet’s cry: “O my Lord! Indeed, these are a people who persist in disbelief.”
43|89|So bear with them and respond with peace. They will soon come to know
44|1|Ḥâ-Mĩm
44|2|By the clear Book
44|3|Indeed, We sent it down on a blessed night, for We always warn ˹against evil˺
44|4|On that night every matter of wisdom is ordained
44|5|by a command from Us, for We have always sent ˹messengers˺
44|6|as a mercy from your Lord. He ˹alone˺ is truly the All-Hearing, All-Knowing—
44|7|the Lord of the heavens and the earth and everything in between, if only you had sure faith
44|8|There is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him. He ˹alone˺ gives life and causes death. ˹He is˺ your Lord, and the Lord of your forefathers
44|9|In fact, they are in doubt, amusing themselves
44|10|Wait then ˹O Prophet˺ for the day ˹when˺ the sky will be veiled in haze, clearly visible
44|11|overwhelming the people. ˹They will cry,˺ “This is a painful torment
44|12|Our Lord! Remove ˹this˺ torment from us, ˹and˺ we will certainly believe.”
44|13|How can they be reminded when a messenger has already come to them, making things clear
44|14|then they turned away from him, saying, “A madman, taught by others!”
44|15|Indeed, We will remove ˹that˺ torment for a while, and you ˹Meccans˺ will return ˹to disbelief˺
44|16|˹Then˺ on the Day We will deal ˹you˺ the fiercest blow, We will surely inflict punishment
44|17|Indeed, before them We tested Pharaoh’s people: a noble messenger came to them
44|18|˹proclaiming,˺ “Hand over the servants of God to me. I am truly a trustworthy messenger to you
44|19|And do not be arrogant with God. I have certainly come to you with a compelling proof
44|20|And indeed, I seek refuge with my Lord and your Lord so you do not stone me ˹to death˺
44|21|˹But˺ if you do not believe me, then let me be.”
44|22|Ultimately, he cried out to his Lord, “These are a wicked people!”
44|23|˹God responded,˺ “Leave with My servants at night, for you will surely be pursued
44|24|And leave the sea parted, for they are certainly an army bound to drown.”
44|25|˹Imagine˺ how many gardens and springs the tyrants left behind
44|26|as well as ˹various˺ crops and splendid residences
44|27|and luxuries which they fully enjoyed
44|28|So it was. And We awarded it ˹all˺ to another people
44|29|Neither heaven nor earth wept over them, nor was their fate delayed
44|30|And We certainly delivered the Children of Israel from the humiliating torment
44|31|of Pharaoh. He was truly a tyrant, a transgressor
44|32|And indeed, We chose the Israelites knowingly above the others
44|33|And We showed them signs in which there was a clear test
44|34|Indeed, these ˹Meccans˺ say
44|35|“There is nothing beyond our first death, and we will never be resurrected
44|36|Bring ˹back˺ our forefathers, if what you say is true.”
44|37|Are they superior to the people of Tubba’ and those before them? We destroyed them ˹all˺, ˹for˺ they were truly wicked
44|38|We did not create the heavens and the earth and everything in between for sport
44|39|We only created them for a purpose, but most of these ˹pagans˺ do not know
44|40|Surely the Day of ˹Final˺ Decision is the time appointed for all—
44|41|the Day no kith or kin will be of benefit to another whatsoever, nor will they be helped
44|42|except those shown mercy by God. He is truly the Almighty, Most Merciful
44|43|Surely ˹the fruit of˺ the tree of Zaqqûm
44|44|will be the food of the evildoer
44|45|Like molten metal, it will boil in the bellies
44|46|like the boiling of hot water
44|47|˹It will be said,˺ “Seize them and drag them into the depths of the Hellfire
44|48|Then pour over their heads the torment of boiling water.”
44|49|˹The wicked will be told,˺ “Taste this. You mighty, noble one
44|50|This is truly what you ˹all˺ used to doubt.”
44|51|Indeed, the righteous will be in a secure place
44|52|amid Gardens and springs
44|53|dressed in fine silk and rich brocade, facing one another
44|54|So it will be. And We will pair them to maidens with gorgeous eyes
44|55|There they will call for every fruit in serenity
44|56|There they will never taste death, beyond the first death. And He will protect them from the punishment of the Hellfire—
44|57|as ˹an act of˺ grace from your Lord. That is ˹truly˺ the ultimate triumph
44|58|Indeed, We have made this ˹Quran˺ easy in your own language ˹O Prophet˺ so perhaps they will be mindful
44|59|Wait then! They too are certainly waiting
45|1|Ḥâ-Mĩm
45|2|The revelation of this Book is from God—the Almighty, All-Wise
45|3|Surely in ˹the creation of˺ the heavens and the earth are signs for the believers
45|4|And in your own creation, and whatever living beings He dispersed, are signs for people of sure faith
45|5|And ˹in˺ the alternation of the day and the night, the provision sent down from the skies by God—reviving the earth after its death—and the shifting of the winds, are signs for people of understanding
45|6|These are God’s revelations which We recite to you ˹O Prophet˺ in truth. So what message will they believe in after ˹denying˺ God and His revelations
45|7|Woe to every sinful liar
45|8|They hear God’s revelations recited to them, then persist ˹in denial˺ arrogantly as if they did not hear them. So give them good news of a painful punishment
45|9|And whenever they learn anything of Our revelations, they make a mockery of it. It is they who will suffer a humiliating punishment
45|10|Awaiting them is Hell. Their ˹worldly˺ gains will not be of any benefit to them whatsoever, nor will those protectors they have taken besides God. And they will suffer a tremendous punishment
45|11|This ˹Quran˺ is ˹true˺ guidance. And those who deny their Lord’s revelations will suffer the ˹worst˺ torment of agonizing pain
45|12|God is the One Who has subjected the sea for you so that ships may sail upon it by His command, and that you may seek His bounty, and that perhaps you will be grateful
45|13|He ˹also˺ subjected for you whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth—all by His grace. Surely in this are signs for people who reflect
45|14|˹O Prophet!˺ Tell the believers to forgive those who do not fear God’s days ˹of torment˺, so that He will reward each group for what they used to commit
45|15|Whoever does good, it is to their own benefit. And whoever does evil, it is to their own loss. Then to your Lord you will ˹all˺ be returned
45|16|Indeed, We gave the Children of Israel the Scripture, wisdom, and prophethood; granted them good, lawful provisions; and favoured them above the others
45|17|We ˹also˺ gave them clear commandments regarding ˹their˺ faith. But it was not until knowledge came to them that they differed out of mutual envy. Surely your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Judgment regarding their differences
45|18|Now We have set you ˹O Prophet˺ on the ˹clear˺ Way of faith. So follow it, and do not follow the desires of those who do not know ˹the truth˺
45|19|They certainly can be of no benefit to you against God whatsoever. Surely the wrongdoers are patrons of each other, whereas God is the Patron of the righteous
45|20|This ˹Quran˺ is an insight for humanity—a guide and mercy for people of sure faith
45|21|Or do those who commit evil deeds ˹simply˺ think that We will make them equal—in their life and after their death—to those who believe and do good? How wrong is their judgment
45|22|For God created the heavens and the earth for a purpose, so that every soul may be paid back for what it has committed. And none will be wronged
45|23|Have you seen ˹O Prophet˺ those who have taken their own desires as their god? ˹And so˺ God left them to stray knowingly, sealed their hearing and hearts, and placed a cover on their sight. Who then can guide them after God? Will you ˹all˺ not then be mindful
45|24|And they argue, “There is nothing beyond our worldly life. We die; others are born. And nothing destroys us but ˹the passage of˺ time.” Yet they have no knowledge ˹in support˺ of this ˹claim˺. They only speculate
45|25|And whenever Our clear revelations are recited to them, their only argument is to say: “Bring our forefathers back, if what you say is true!”
45|26|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “˹It is˺ God ˹Who˺ gives you life, then causes you to die, then will gather you ˹all˺ on the Day of Judgment, about which there is no doubt. But most people do not know.”
45|27|To God ˹alone˺ belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. On the Day the Hour will be established, the people of falsehood will then be in ˹total˺ loss
45|28|And you will see every faith-community on its knees. Every community will be summoned to its record ˹of deeds˺. ˹They all will be told,˺ “This Day you will be rewarded for what you used to do
45|29|This record of Ours speaks the truth about you. Indeed, We always had your deeds recorded ˹by the angels˺.”
45|30|As for those who believed and did good, their Lord will admit them into His mercy. That is ˹truly˺ the absolute triumph
45|31|And as for those who disbelieved, ˹they will be told,˺ “Were My revelations not recited to you, yet you acted arrogantly and were a wicked people
45|32|And whenever it was said ˹to you˺, ‘Surely God’s promise ˹of judgment˺ is true and there is no doubt about the Hour,’ you said ˹mockingly˺, ‘We do not know what the Hour is! We think it is no more than speculation, and we are not convinced ˹that it will ever come˺.’”
45|33|And the evil ˹consequences˺ of their deeds will unfold before them, and they will be overwhelmed by what they used to ridicule
45|34|It will be said, “This Day We will neglect you as you neglected the meeting of this Day of yours! Your home will be the Fire, and you will have no helpers
45|35|This is because you made a mockery of God’s revelations, and were deluded by ˹your˺ worldly life.” So ˹from˺ that Day ˹on˺ they will not be taken out of the Fire, nor will they be allowed to appease ˹their Lord˺
45|36|So all praise is for God—Lord of the heavens and Lord of the earth, Lord of all worlds
45|37|To Him belongs ˹all˺ Majesty in the heavens and the earth. And He is the Almighty, All-Wise
46|1|Ḥâ-Mĩm
46|2|The revelation of this Book is from God—the Almighty, All-Wise
46|3|We only created the heavens and the earth and everything in between for a purpose and an appointed term. Yet the disbelievers are turning away from what they have been warned about
46|4|Ask ˹them, O Prophet˺, “Have you considered whatever ˹idols˺ you invoke besides God? Show me what they have created on earth! Or do they have a share in ˹the creation of˺ the heavens? Bring me a scripture ˹revealed˺ before this ˹Quran˺ or a shred of knowledge, if what you say is true.”
46|5|And who could be more astray than those who call upon others besides God—˹others˺ that cannot respond to them until the Day of Judgment, and are ˹even˺ unaware of their calls
46|6|And when ˹such˺ people will be gathered together, those ˹gods˺ will be their enemies and will disown their worship
46|7|Whenever Our clear revelations are recited to them, the disbelievers say of the truth when it has come to them, “This is pure magic.”
46|8|Or do they say, “He has fabricated this ˹Quran˺!”? Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “If I have done so, then there is nothing whatsoever you can do to save me from God. He knows best what ˹slurs˺ you indulge about it. Sufficient is He as a Witness between you and me. And He is the All-Forgiving, Most Merciful.”
46|9|Say, “I am not the first messenger ever sent, nor do I know what will happen to me or you. I only follow what is revealed to me. And I am only sent with a clear warning.”
46|10|Ask ˹them, O Prophet˺, “Consider if this ˹Quran˺ is ˹truly˺ from God and you deny it, and a witness from the Children of Israel attests to it and then believes, whereas you act arrogantly. Surely God does not guide the wrongdoing people.”
46|11|The disbelievers say of the believers, “Had it been ˹something˺ good, they would not have beaten us to it.” Now since they reject its guidance, they will say, “˹This is˺ an ancient fabrication!”
46|12|And before this ˹Quran˺ the Book of Moses was ˹revealed as˺ a guide and mercy. And this Book is a confirmation, in the Arabic tongue, to warn those who do wrong, and as good news to those who do good
46|13|Surely those who say, “Our Lord is God,” and then remain steadfast—there will be no fear for them, nor will they grieve
46|14|It is they who will be the residents of Paradise, staying there forever, as a reward for what they used to do
46|15|We have commanded people to honour their parents. Their mothers bore them in hardship and delivered them in hardship. Their ˹period of˺ bearing and weaning is thirty months. In time, when the child reaches their prime at the age of forty, they pray, “My Lord! Inspire me to ˹always˺ be thankful for Your favours which You blessed me and my parents with, and to do good deeds that please You. And instil righteousness in my offspring. I truly repent to You, and I truly submit ˹to Your Will˺.”
46|16|It is from these ˹people˺ that We will accept the good they did, and overlook their misdeeds—along with the residents of Paradise, ˹in fulfilment of˺ the true promise they have been given
46|17|But some scold their parents, “Enough with you! Are you warning me that I will be brought forth ˹from the grave˺, while many generations had already perished before me ˹for good˺?” The parents cry to God for help, ˹and warn their child,˺ “Pity you. Have faith! Surely God’s promise is true.” But the deniers insist, “This is nothing but ancient fables.”
46|18|These are the ones against whom the fate of earlier communities of jinn and humans has been justified, ˹for˺ they were truly losers
46|19|Each ˹of the two groups˺ will be ranked according to what they have done so He may fully reward all. And none will be wronged
46|20|˹Watch for˺ the Day ˹when˺ the disbelievers will be exposed to the Fire. ˹They will be told,˺ “You ˹already˺ exhausted your ˹share of˺ pleasures during your worldly life, and ˹fully˺ enjoyed them. So Today you will be rewarded with the torment of disgrace for your arrogance throughout the land with no right, and for your rebelliousness.”
46|21|And remember the brother of ’Ȃd, when he warned his people, who inhabited the sand-hills—there were certainly warners before and after him—˹saying,˺ “Worship none but God. I truly fear for you the torment of a tremendous day.”
46|22|They argued, “Have you come to turn us away from our gods? Bring us then whatever you threaten us with, if what you say is true.”
46|23|He responded, “The knowledge ˹of its time˺ is only with God. I only convey to you what I have been sent with. But I can see that you are a people acting ignorantly.”
46|24|Then when they saw the torment as a ˹dense˺ cloud approaching their valleys, they said ˹happily˺, “This is a cloud bringing us rain.” ˹But Hûd replied,˺ “No, it is what you sought to hasten: a ˹fierce˺ wind carrying a painful punishment!”
46|25|It destroyed everything by the command of its Lord, leaving nothing visible except their ruins. This is how We reward the wicked people
46|26|Indeed, We had established them in a way We have not established you ˹Meccans˺. And We gave them hearing, sight, and intellect. But neither their hearing, sight, nor intellect were of any benefit to them whatsoever, since they persisted in denying God’s signs. And ˹so˺ they were overwhelmed by what they used to ridicule
46|27|We certainly destroyed the societies around you after having varied the signs so perhaps they would return ˹to the Right Path˺
46|28|Why then did those ˹idols˺ they took as gods—hoping to get closer ˹to Him˺—not come to their aid? Instead, they failed them. That is ˹the result of˺ their lies and their fabrications
46|29|˹Remember, O Prophet,˺ when We sent a group of jinn your way to listen to the Quran. Then, upon hearing it, they said ˹to one another˺, “Listen quietly!” Then when it was over, they returned to their fellow jinn as warners
46|30|They declared, “O our fellow jinn! We have truly heard a scripture revealed after Moses, confirming what came before it. It guides to the truth and the Straight Way
46|31|O our fellow jinn! Respond to the caller of God and believe in him, He will forgive your sins and protect you from a painful punishment
46|32|And whoever does not respond to the caller of God will have no escape on earth, nor will they have any protectors against Him. It is they who are clearly astray.”
46|33|Do they not realize that God, Who created the heavens and the earth and did not tire in creating them, is able to give life to the dead? Yes ˹indeed˺! He is certainly Most Capable of everything
46|34|And on the Day the disbelievers will be exposed to the Fire, ˹they will be asked,˺ “Is this ˹Hereafter˺ not the truth?” They will cry, “Absolutely, by our Lord!” It will be said, “Then taste the punishment for your disbelief.”
46|35|So endure patiently, as did the Messengers of Firm Resolve. And do not ˹seek to˺ hasten ˹the torment˺ for the deniers. On the Day they see what they have been threatened with, it will be as if they had only stayed ˹in this world˺ for an hour of a day. ˹This is˺ a ˹sufficient˺ warning! Then, will anyone be destroyed except the rebellious people
47|1|Those who disbelieve and hinder ˹others˺ from the Way of God, He will render their deeds void
47|2|As for those who believe, do good, and have faith in what has been revealed to Muḥammad—which is the truth from their Lord—He will absolve them of their sins and improve their condition
47|3|This is because the disbelievers follow falsehood, while the believers follow the truth from their Lord. This is how God shows people their true state ˹of faith˺
47|4|So when you meet the disbelievers ˹in battle˺, strike ˹their˺ necks until you have thoroughly subdued them, then bind them firmly. Later ˹free them either as˺ an act of grace or by ransom until the war comes to an end. So will it be. Had God willed, He ˹Himself˺ could have inflicted punishment on them. But He does ˹this only to˺ test some of you by means of others. And those who are martyred in the cause of God, He will never render their deeds void
47|5|He will guide them ˹to their reward˺, improve their condition
47|6|and admit them into Paradise, having made it known to them
47|7|O believers! If you stand up for God, He will help you and make your steps firm
47|8|As for the disbelievers, may they be doomed and may He render their deeds void
47|9|That is because they detest what God has revealed, so He has rendered their deeds void
47|10|Have they not travelled throughout the land to see what was the end of those before them? God annihilated them, and a similar fate awaits the disbelievers
47|11|This is because God is the Patron of the believers while the disbelievers have no patron
47|12|Surely God will admit those who believe and do good into Gardens under which rivers flow. As for the disbelievers, they enjoy themselves and feed like cattle. But the Fire will be their home
47|13|˹Imagine, O Prophet,˺ how many societies We destroyed that were far superior in might than your society—which drove you out—and there was none to help them
47|14|Can those ˹believers˺ who stand on clear proof from their Lord be like those whose evil deeds are made appealing to them and ˹only˺ follow their desires
47|15|The description of the Paradise promised to the righteous is that in it are rivers of fresh water, rivers of milk that never changes in taste, rivers of wine delicious to drink, and rivers of pure honey. There they will ˹also˺ have all kinds of fruit, and forgiveness from their Lord. ˹Can they be˺ like those who will stay in the Fire forever, left to drink boiling water that will tear apart their insides
47|16|There are some of them who listen to you ˹O Prophet˺, but when they depart from you, they say ˹mockingly˺ to those ˹believers˺ gifted with knowledge, “What did he just say?” These are the ones whose hearts God has sealed and who ˹only˺ follow their desires
47|17|As for those who are ˹rightly˺ guided, He increases them in guidance and blesses them with righteousness
47|18|Are they only waiting for the Hour to take them by surprise? Yet ˹some of˺ its signs have already come. Once it actually befalls them, will it not be too late to be mindful
47|19|So, know ˹well, O Prophet,˺ that there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except God. And seek forgiveness for your shortcomings and for ˹the sins of˺ the believing men and women. For God ˹fully˺ knows your movements and places of rest ˹O people˺
47|20|And the believers say, “If only a sûrah was revealed ˹allowing self-defence˺!” Yet when a precise sûrah is revealed, in which fighting is ˹explicitly˺ mentioned, you see those with sickness in their hearts staring at you like someone in the throes of death. It would have been better for them
47|21|to obey and speak rightly. Then when fighting was ordained, it surely would have been better for them if they were true to God
47|22|Now if you ˹hypocrites˺ turn away, perhaps you would then spread corruption throughout the land and sever your ˹ties of˺ kinship
47|23|These are the ones who God has condemned, deafening them and blinding their eyes
47|24|Do they not then reflect on the Quran? Or are there locks upon their hearts
47|25|Indeed, those who relapse ˹into disbelief˺ after ˹true˺ guidance has become clear to them, ˹it is˺ Satan ˹that˺ has tempted them, luring them with false hopes
47|26|That is because they said ˹privately˺ to those who ˹also˺ detest what God has revealed, “We will obey you in some matters.” But God ˹fully˺ knows what they are hiding
47|27|Then how ˹horrible˺ will it be when the angels take their souls, beating their faces and backs
47|28|This is because they follow whatever displeases God and hate whatever pleases Him, so He has rendered their deeds void
47|29|Or do those with sickness in their hearts think that God will not ˹be able to˺ expose their malice
47|30|Had We willed, We could have truly shown them to you ˹O Prophet˺, and you would have certainly recognized them by their appearance. But you will surely recognize them by their tone of speech. And God ˹fully˺ knows your doings ˹O people˺
47|31|We will certainly test you ˹believers˺ until We prove those of you who ˹truly˺ struggle ˹in God’s cause˺ and remain steadfast, and reveal how you conduct yourselves
47|32|Indeed, those who disbelieve, hinder ˹others˺ from the Way of God, and defy the Messenger after ˹true˺ guidance has become clear to them; they will not harm God in the least, but He will render their deeds void
47|33|O believers! Obey God and obey the Messenger, and do not let your deeds be in vain
47|34|Surely those who disbelieve, hinder ˹others˺ from the Way of God, and then die as disbelievers; God will never forgive them
47|35|So do not falter or cry for peace, for you will have the upper hand and God is with you. And He will never let your deeds go to waste
47|36|This worldly life is no more than play and amusement. But if you are faithful and mindful ˹of God˺, He will grant you your ˹full˺ reward, and will not ask you ˹to donate all˺ your wealth
47|37|If He were to do so and pressure you, you would withhold and He would bring out your resentment
47|38|Here you are, being invited to donate ˹a little˺ in the cause of God. Still some of you withhold. And whoever does so, it is only to their own loss. For God is the Self-Sufficient, whereas you stand in need ˹of Him˺. If you ˹still˺ turn away, He will replace you with another people. And they will not be like you
48|1|Indeed, We have granted you a clear triumph ˹O Prophet˺
48|2|so that God may forgive you for your past and future shortcomings, perfect His favour upon you, guide you along the Straight Path
48|3|and so that God will help you tremendously
48|4|He is the One Who sent down serenity upon the hearts of the believers so that they may increase even more in their faith. To God ˹alone˺ belong the forces of the heavens and the earth. And God is All-Knowing, All-Wise
48|5|So He may admit believing men and women into Gardens under which rivers flow—to stay there forever—and absolve them of their sins. And that is a supreme achievement in the sight of God
48|6|Also ˹so that˺ He may punish hypocrite men and women and polytheistic men and women, who harbour evil thoughts of God. May ill-fate befall them! God is displeased with them. He has condemned them and prepared for them Hell. What an evil destination
48|7|To God ˹alone˺ belong the forces of the heavens and the earth. And God is Almighty, All-Wise
48|8|Indeed, ˹O Prophet,˺ We have sent you as a witness, a deliverer of good news, and a warner
48|9|so that you ˹believers˺ may have faith in God and His Messenger, support and honour him, and glorify God morning and evening
48|10|Surely those who pledge allegiance to you ˹O Prophet˺ are actually pledging allegiance to God. God’s Hand is over theirs. Whoever breaks their pledge, it will only be to their own loss. And whoever fulfils their pledge to God, He will grant them a great reward
48|11|The nomadic Arabs, who stayed behind, will say to you ˹O Prophet˺, “We were preoccupied with our wealth and families, so ask for forgiveness for us.” They say with their tongues what is not in their hearts. Say, “Who then can stand between you and God in any way, if He intends harm or benefit for you? In fact, God is All-Aware of what you do
48|12|The truth is: you thought that the Messenger and the believers would never return to their families again. And that was made appealing in your hearts. You harboured evil thoughts ˹about God˺, and ˹so˺ became a doomed people.”
48|13|And whoever does not believe in God and His Messenger, then We surely have prepared for the disbelievers a blazing Fire
48|14|To God ˹alone˺ belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He forgives whoever He wills, and punishes whoever He wills. And God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
48|15|Those who stayed behind will say, when you ˹believers˺ set out to take the spoils of war, “Let us accompany you.” They wish to change God’s promise. Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “You will not accompany us. This is what God has said before.” They will then say, “In fact, you are driven by jealousy against us!” The truth is: they can hardly comprehend
48|16|Say to nomadic Arabs, who stayed behind, “You will be called ˹to fight˺ against a people of great might, who you will fight unless they submit. If you then obey, God will grant you a fine reward. But if you turn away as you did before, He will inflict upon you a painful punishment.”
48|17|There is no blame on the blind, or the disabled, or the sick ˹for staying behind˺. And whoever obeys God and His Messenger will be admitted by Him into Gardens under which rivers flow. But whoever turns away will be subjected by Him to a painful punishment
48|18|Indeed, God was pleased with the believers when they pledged allegiance to you ˹O Prophet˺ under the tree. He knew what was in their hearts, so He sent down serenity upon them and rewarded them with a victory at hand
48|19|and many spoils of war they will gain. For God is Almighty, All-Wise
48|20|God has promised you ˹believers˺ abundant spoils, which you will gain, so He hastened this ˹truce˺ for you. And He has held people’s hands back from ˹harming˺ you, so it may be a sign for the believers, and so He may guide you along the Straight Path
48|21|And ˹there are˺ other gains which are beyond your reach that God is keeping in store ˹for you˺. For God is Most Capable of everything
48|22|If the disbelievers were to fight you, they would certainly flee. Then they would never find any protector or helper
48|23|˹This is˺ God’s way, already long established ˹in the past˺. And you will find no change in God’s way
48|24|He is the One Who held back their hands from you and your hands from them in the valley of ˹Ḥudaibiyah, near˺ Mecca, after giving you the upper hand over ˹a group of˺ them. And God is All-Seeing of what you do
48|25|They are the ones who persisted in disbelief and hindered you from the Sacred Mosque, preventing the sacrificial animals from reaching their destination. ˹We would have let you march through Mecca,˺ had there not been believing men and women, unknown to you. You might have trampled them underfoot, incurring guilt for ˹what you did to˺ them unknowingly. That was so God may admit into His mercy whoever He wills. Had those ˹unknown˺ believers stood apart, We would have certainly inflicted a painful punishment on the disbelievers
48|26|˹Remember˺ when the disbelievers had filled their hearts with pride—the pride of ˹pre-Islamic˺ ignorance—then God sent down His serenity upon His Messenger and the believers, inspiring them to uphold the declaration of faith, for they were better entitled and more worthy of it. And God has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all things
48|27|Indeed, God will fulfil His Messenger’s vision in all truth: God willing, you will surely enter the Sacred Mosque, in security—˹some with˺ heads shaved and ˹others with˺ hair shortened—without fear. He knew what you did not know, so He first granted you the triumph at hand
48|28|He is the One Who has sent His Messenger with ˹right˺ guidance and the religion of truth, making it prevail over all others. And sufficient is God as a Witness
48|29|Muḥammad is the Messenger of God. And those with him are firm with the disbelievers and compassionate with one another. You see them bowing and prostrating ˹in prayer˺, seeking God’s bounty and pleasure. The sign ˹of brightness can be seen˺ on their faces from the trace of prostrating ˹in prayer˺. This is their description in the Torah. And their parable in the Gospel is that of a seed that sprouts its ˹tiny˺ branches, making it strong. Then it becomes thick, standing firmly on its stem, to the delight of the planters—in this way God makes the believers a source of dismay for the disbelievers. To those of them who believe and do good, God has promised forgiveness and a great reward
49|1|O believers! Do not proceed ˹in any matter˺ before ˹a decree from˺ God and His Messenger. And fear God. Surely God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing
49|2|O believers! Do not raise your voices above the voice of the Prophet, nor speak loudly to him as you do to one another, or your deeds will become void while you are unaware
49|3|Indeed, those who lower their voices in the presence of God’s Messenger are the ones whose hearts God has refined for righteousness. They will have forgiveness and a great reward
49|4|Indeed, most of those who call out to you ˹O Prophet˺ from outside ˹your˺ private quarters have no understanding ˹of manners˺
49|5|Had they been patient until you could come out to them, it would have certainly been better for them. And God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
49|6|O believers, if an evildoer brings you any news, verify ˹it˺ so you do not harm people unknowingly, becoming regretful for what you have done
49|7|And keep in mind that God’s Messenger is ˹still˺ in your midst. If he were to yield to you in many matters, you would surely suffer ˹the consequences˺. But God has endeared faith to you, making it appealing in your hearts. And He has made disbelief, rebelliousness, and disobedience detestable to you. Those are the ones rightly guided
49|8|˹This is˺ a bounty and a blessing from God. And God is All-Knowing, All-Wise
49|9|And if two groups of believers fight each other, then make peace between them. But if one of them transgresses against the other, then fight against the transgressing group until they ˹are willing to˺ submit to the rule of God. If they do so, then make peace between both ˹groups˺ in all fairness and act justly. Surely God loves those who uphold justice
49|10|The believers are but one brotherhood, so make peace between your brothers. And be mindful of God so you may be shown mercy
49|11|O believers! Do not let some ˹men˺ ridicule others, they may be better than them, nor let ˹some˺ women ridicule other women, they may be better than them. Do not defame one another, nor call each other by offensive nicknames. How evil it is to act rebelliously after having faith! And whoever does not repent, it is they who are the ˹true˺ wrongdoers
49|12|O believers! Avoid many suspicions, ˹for˺ indeed, some suspicions are sinful. And do not spy, nor backbite one another. Would any of you like to eat the flesh of their dead brother? You would despise that! And fear God. Surely God is ˹the˺ Accepter of Repentance, Most Merciful
49|13|O humanity! Indeed, We created you from a male and a female, and made you into peoples and tribes so that you may ˹get to˺ know one another. Surely the most noble of you in the sight of God is the most righteous among you. God is truly All-Knowing, All-Aware
49|14|˹Some of˺ the nomadic Arabs say, “We believe.” Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “You have not believed. But say, ‘We have submitted,’ for faith has not yet entered your hearts. But if you obey God and His Messenger ˹wholeheartedly˺, He will not discount anything from ˹the reward of˺ your deeds. God is truly All-Forgiving, Most Merciful.”
49|15|The ˹true˺ believers are only those who believe in God and His Messenger—never doubting—and strive with their wealth and their lives in the cause of God. They are the ones true in faith
49|16|Say, “Do you inform God of your faith, when God ˹already˺ knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth? And God has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all things.”
49|17|They regard their acceptance of Islam as a favour to you. Tell ˹them, O Prophet˺, “Do not regard your Islam as a favour to me. Rather, it is God Who has done you a favour by guiding you to the faith, if ˹indeed˺ you are faithful
49|18|Surely God knows the unseen of the heavens and earth. And God is All-Seeing of what you do.”
50|1|Qãf. By the glorious Quran
50|2|˹All will be resurrected,˺ yet the deniers are astonished that a warner has come to them from among themselves ˹warning of resurrection˺. So the disbelievers say, “This is an astonishing thing
50|3|˹Will we be returned to life,˺ when we are dead and reduced to dust? Such a return is impossible.”
50|4|We certainly know what the earth consumes of them ˹after their death˺, and with us is a well-preserved Record
50|5|In fact, they reject the truth when it has come to them, so they are in a confused state
50|6|Have they not then looked at the sky above them: how We built it and adorned it ˹with stars˺, leaving it flawless
50|7|As for the earth, We spread it out and placed upon it firm mountains, and produced in it every type of pleasant plant—
50|8|˹all as˺ an insight and a reminder to every servant who turns ˹to God˺
50|9|And We send down blessed rain from the sky, bringing forth gardens and grains for harvest
50|10|and towering palm trees ˹loaded˺ with clustered fruit
50|11|˹as˺ a provision for ˹Our˺ servants. And with this ˹rain˺ We revive a lifeless land. Similar is the emergence ˹from the graves˺
50|12|Before them, the people of Noah denied ˹the truth,˺ as did the people of the Water-pit, Thamûd
50|13|’Ȃd, Pharaoh, the kinfolk of Lot
50|14|the residents of the Forest, and the people of Tubba’. Each rejected ˹their˺ messenger, so My warning was fulfilled
50|15|Were We incapable of creating ˹them˺ the first time? In fact, they are in doubt about ˹their˺ re-creation
50|16|Indeed, ˹it is˺ We ˹Who˺ created humankind and ˹fully˺ know what their souls whisper to them, and We are closer to them than ˹their˺ jugular vein
50|17|As the two recording-angels—˹one˺ sitting to the right, and ˹the other to˺ the left—note ˹everything˺
50|18|not a word does a person utter without having a ˹vigilant˺ observer ready ˹to write it down˺
50|19|˹Ultimately,˺ with the throes of death will come the truth. This is what you were trying to escape
50|20|And the Trumpet will be blown. This is the Day ˹you were˺ warned of
50|21|Each soul will come forth with an angel to drive it and another to testify
50|22|˹It will be said to the denier,˺ “You were totally heedless of this. Now We have lifted this veil of yours, so Today your sight is sharp!”
50|23|And one’s accompanying-angel will say, “Here is the record ready with me.”
50|24|˹It will be said to both angels,˺ “Throw into Hell every stubborn disbeliever
50|25|withholder of good, transgressor, and doubter
50|26|who set up another god with God. So cast them into the severe punishment.”
50|27|One’s ˹devilish˺ associate will say, “Our Lord! I did not make them transgress. Rather, they were far astray ˹on their own˺.”
50|28|God will respond, “Do not dispute in My presence, since I had already given you a warning
50|29|My Word cannot be changed, nor am I unjust to ˹My˺ creation.”
50|30|˹Beware of˺ the Day We will ask Hell, “Are you full ˹yet˺?” And it will respond, “Are there any more?”
50|31|And Paradise will be brought near to the righteous, not far off
50|32|˹And it will be said to them,˺ “This is what you were promised, for whoever ˹constantly˺ turned ˹to God˺ and kept up ˹His commandments˺—
50|33|who were in awe of the Most Compassionate without seeing ˹Him˺, and have come with a heart turning ˹only to Him˺
50|34|Enter it in peace. This is the Day of eternal life!”
50|35|There they will have whatever they desire, and with Us is ˹even˺ more
50|36|˹Imagine˺ how many peoples We destroyed before them, who were far mightier than them. Then ˹when the torment came,˺ they ˹desperately˺ sought refuge in the land. ˹But˺ was there any escape
50|37|Surely in this is a reminder for whoever has a ˹mindful˺ heart and lends an attentive ear
50|38|Indeed, We created the heavens and the earth and everything in between in six Days, and We were not ˹even˺ touched with fatigue
50|39|So be patient ˹O Prophet˺ with what they say. And glorify the praises of your Lord before sunrise and before sunset
50|40|And glorify Him during part of the night and after the prayers
50|41|And listen! On the Day the caller will call out from a near place
50|42|the Day all will hear the ˹mighty˺ Blast in ˹all˺ truth, that will be the Day of emergence ˹from the graves˺
50|43|It is certainly We Who give life and cause death. And to Us is the final return
50|44|˹Beware of˺ the Day the earth will split open, letting them rush forth. That will be an easy gathering for Us
50|45|We know best what they say. And you ˹O Prophet˺ are not ˹there˺ to compel them ˹to believe˺. So remind with the Quran ˹only˺ those who fear My warning
51|1|By the winds scattering ˹dust˺
51|2|and ˹the clouds˺ loaded with rain
51|3|and ˹the ships˺ gliding with ease
51|4|and ˹the angels˺ administering affairs by ˹God’s˺ command
51|5|Indeed, what you are promised is true
51|6|And the Judgment will certainly come to pass
51|7|˹And˺ by the heavens in their marvellous design
51|8|Surely you are ˹lost˺ in conflicting views ˹regarding the truth˺
51|9|Only those ˹destined to be˺ deluded are turned away from it
51|10|Condemned are the liars—
51|11|those who are ˹steeped˺ in ignorance, totally heedless
51|12|They ask ˹mockingly˺, “When is this Day of Judgment?”
51|13|˹It is˺ the Day they will be tormented over the Fire
51|14|˹They will be told,˺ “Taste your torment! This is what you sought to hasten.”
51|15|Indeed, the righteous will be amid Gardens and springs
51|16|˹joyfully˺ receiving what their Lord will grant them. Before this ˹reward˺ they were truly good-doers ˹in the world˺
51|17|they used to sleep only little in the night
51|18|and pray for forgiveness before dawn
51|19|And in their wealth there was a rightful share ˹fulfilled˺ for the beggar and the poor
51|20|There are ˹countless˺ signs on earth for those with sure faith
51|21|as there are within yourselves. Can you not see
51|22|In heaven is your sustenance and whatever you are promised
51|23|Then by the Lord of heaven and earth! ˹All˺ this is certainly as true as ˹the fact that˺ you can speak
51|24|Has the story of Abraham’s honoured guests reached you ˹O Prophet˺
51|25|˹Remember˺ when they entered his presence and greeted ˹him with˺, “Peace!” He replied, “Peace ˹be upon you˺!” ˹Then he said to himself,˺ “˹These are˺ an unfamiliar people.”
51|26|Then he slipped off to his family and brought a fat ˹roasted˺ calf
51|27|and placed it before them, asking, “Will you not eat?”
51|28|˹They did not eat,˺ so he grew fearful of them. They reassured ˹him˺, “Do not be afraid,” and gave him good news of a knowledgeable son
51|29|Then his wife came forward with a cry, clasping her forehead ˹in astonishment˺, exclaiming, “˹A baby from˺ a barren, old woman!”
51|30|They replied, “Such has your Lord decreed. He is truly the All-Wise, All-Knowing.”
51|31|˹Later,˺ Abraham asked, “What is your mission, O messengers?”
51|32|They replied, “We have actually been sent to a wicked people
51|33|to send upon them stones of ˹baked˺ clay
51|34|marked by your Lord for the transgressors.”
51|35|Then ˹before the torment˺ We evacuated the believers from the city
51|36|But We only found one family that had submitted ˹to God˺
51|37|And We have left a sign there ˹as a lesson˺ for those who fear the painful punishment
51|38|And in ˹the story of˺ Moses ˹was another lesson,˺ when We sent him to Pharaoh with compelling proof
51|39|but Pharaoh was carried away by his power, saying ˹of Moses˺, “A magician or a madman!”
51|40|So We seized him and his soldiers, casting them into the sea while he was blameworthy
51|41|And in ˹the story of˺ ’Âd ˹was another lesson,˺ when We sent against them the devastating wind
51|42|There was nothing it came upon that it did not reduce to ashes
51|43|And in ˹the story of˺ Thamûd ˹was another lesson,˺ when they were told, “Enjoy yourselves ˹only˺ for a ˹short˺ while.”
51|44|Still they persisted in defying the commands of their Lord, so they were overtaken by a ˹mighty˺ blast while they were looking on
51|45|Then they were not able to rise up, nor were they helped
51|46|And the people of Noah ˹had also been destroyed˺ earlier. They were truly a rebellious people
51|47|We built the universe with ˹great˺ might, and We are certainly expanding ˹it˺
51|48|As for the earth, We spread it out. How superbly did We smooth it out
51|49|And We created pairs of all things so perhaps you would be mindful
51|50|So ˹proclaim, O Prophet˺: “Flee to God! I am truly sent by Him with a clear warning to you
51|51|And do not set up another god with God. I am truly sent by Him with a clear warning to you.”
51|52|Similarly, no messenger came to those before them without being told: “A magician or a madman!”
51|53|Have they passed this ˹cliché˺ down to one another? In fact, they have ˹all˺ been a transgressing people
51|54|So ˹now˺ turn away from them ˹O Prophet˺, for you will not be blamed
51|55|But ˹continue to˺ remind. For certainly reminders benefit the believers
51|56|I did not create jinn and humans except to worship Me
51|57|I seek no provision from them, nor do I need them to feed Me
51|58|Indeed, God ˹alone˺ is the Supreme Provider—Lord of all Power, Ever Mighty
51|59|The wrongdoers will certainly have a share ˹of the torment˺ like that of their predecessors. So do not let them ask Me to hasten ˹it˺
51|60|Woe then to the disbelievers when they face their Day which they are warned of
52|1|By Mount Ṭûr
52|2|And by the Book written
52|3|on open pages ˹for all to read˺
52|4|And by the ˹Sacred˺ House frequently visited
52|5|And by the canopy raised ˹high˺
52|6|And by the seas set on fire
52|7|Indeed, the punishment of your Lord will come to pass—
52|8|none will avert it—
52|9|on the Day the heavens will be shaken violently
52|10|and the mountains will be blown away entirely
52|11|Then woe on that Day to the deniers—
52|12|those who amuse themselves with falsehood
52|13|˹It is˺ the Day they will be fiercely shoved into the Fire of Hell
52|14|˹They will be told,˺ “This is the Fire which you used to deny
52|15|Is this magic, or do you not see
52|16|Burn in it! It is the same whether you endure ˹it˺ patiently or not. You are only rewarded for what you used to do.”
52|17|Indeed, the righteous will be in Gardens and bliss
52|18|enjoying whatever their Lord will have granted them. And their Lord will have protected them from the torment of the Hellfire
52|19|˹They will be told,˺ “Eat and drink happily for what you used to do.”
52|20|They will be reclining on thrones, ˹neatly˺ lined up ˹facing each other˺. And We will pair them to maidens with gorgeous eyes
52|21|As for those who believe and whose descendants follow them in faith, We will elevate their descendants to their rank, never discounting anything ˹of the reward˺ of their deeds. Every person will reap only what they sowed
52|22|And We will ˹continually˺ provide them with whatever fruit or meat they desire
52|23|They will pass around to each other a drink ˹of pure wine,˺ which leads to no idle talk or sinfulness
52|24|And they will be waited on by their youthful servants like spotless pearls
52|25|They will turn to one another inquisitively
52|26|They will say, “Before ˹this reward˺ we used to be in awe ˹of God˺ in the midst of our people
52|27|So God has graced us and protected us from the torment of ˹Hell’s˺ scorching heat
52|28|Indeed, we used to call upon Him ˹alone˺ before. He is truly the Most Kind, Most Merciful.”
52|29|So ˹continue to˺ remind ˹all, O Prophet˺. For you, by the grace of your Lord, are not a fortune-teller or a madman
52|30|Or do they say, “˹He is˺ a poet, for whom we ˹eagerly˺ await an ill-fate!”
52|31|Say, “Keep waiting! I too am waiting with you.”
52|32|Or do their ˹intelligent˺ minds prompt them to this ˹paradox˺? Or are they ˹just˺ a transgressing people
52|33|Or do they say, “He made this ˹Quran˺ up!”? In fact, they have no faith
52|34|Let them then produce something like it, if what they say is true
52|35|Or were they created by nothing, or are they ˹their own˺ creators
52|36|Or did they create the heavens and the earth? In fact, they have no firm belief ˹in God˺
52|37|Or do they possess the treasuries of your Lord, or are they in control ˹of everything˺
52|38|Or do they have a stairway, by which they eavesdrop ˹on the heavens˺? Then let those who do so bring a compelling proof
52|39|Or does He have daughters ˹as you claim˺, while you ˹prefer to˺ have sons
52|40|Or are you ˹O Prophet˺ asking them for a reward ˹for the message˺ so that they are overburdened by debt
52|41|Or do they have access to ˹the Record in˺ the unseen, so they copy it ˹for all to see˺
52|42|Or do they intend to scheme ˹against the Prophet˺? Then it is the disbelievers who will fall victim to ˹their˺ schemes
52|43|Or do they have a god other than God? Glorified is God far above what they associate ˹with Him˺
52|44|If they were to see a ˹deadly˺ piece of the sky fall down ˹upon them˺, still they would say, “˹This is just˺ a pile of clouds.”
52|45|So leave them until they face their Day in which they will be struck dead—
52|46|the Day their scheming will be of no benefit to them whatsoever, nor will they be helped
52|47|Also, the wrongdoers will certainly have another torment before that ˹Day˺, but most of them do not know
52|48|So be patient with your Lord’s decree, for you are truly under Our ˹watchful˺ Eyes. And glorify the praises of your Lord when you rise
52|49|And glorify Him during part of the night and at the fading of the stars
53|1|By the stars when they fade away
53|2|Your fellow man is neither misguided nor astray
53|3|Nor does he speak of his own whims
53|4|It is only a revelation sent down ˹to him˺
53|5|He has been taught by one ˹angel˺ of mighty power
53|6|and great perfection, who once rose to ˹his˺ true form
53|7|while on the highest point above the horizon
53|8|then he approached ˹the Prophet˺, coming so close
53|9|that he was only two arms-lengths away or even less
53|10|Then God revealed to His servant what He revealed ˹through Gabriel˺
53|11|The ˹Prophet’s˺ heart did not doubt what he saw
53|12|How can you ˹O pagans˺ then dispute with him regarding what he saw
53|13|And he certainly saw that ˹angel descend˺ a second time
53|14|at the Lote Tree of the most extreme limit ˹in the seventh heaven˺—
53|15|near which is the Garden of ˹Eternal˺ Residence—
53|16|while the Lote Tree was overwhelmed with ˹heavenly˺ splendours
53|17|The ˹Prophet’s˺ sight never wandered, nor did it overreach
53|18|He certainly saw some of his Lord’s greatest signs
53|19|Now, have you considered ˹the idols of˺ Lât and ’Uzza
53|20|and the third one, Manât, as well
53|21|Do you ˹prefer to˺ have sons while ˹you attribute˺ to Him daughters
53|22|Then this is ˹truly˺ a biased distribution
53|23|These ˹idols˺ are mere names that you and your forefathers have made up—a practice God has never authorized. They follow nothing but ˹inherited˺ assumptions and whatever ˹their˺ souls desire, although ˹true˺ guidance has already come to them from their Lord
53|24|Or should every person ˹simply˺ have whatever ˹intercessors˺ they desire
53|25|In fact, to God ˹alone˺ belongs this world and the next
53|26|˹Imagine˺ how many ˹noble˺ angels are in the heavens! ˹Even˺ their intercession would be of no benefit whatsoever, until God gives permission to whoever He wills and ˹only for the people He˺ approves
53|27|Indeed, those who do not believe in the Hereafter label angels as female
53|28|although they have no knowledge ˹in support˺ of this. They follow nothing but ˹inherited˺ assumptions. And surely assumptions can in no way replace the truth
53|29|So turn away ˹O Prophet˺ from whoever has shunned Our Reminder, only seeking the ˹fleeting˺ life of this world
53|30|This is the extent of their knowledge. Surely your Lord knows best who has strayed from His Way and who is ˹rightly˺ guided
53|31|To God ˹alone˺ belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth so that He may reward the evildoers according to what they did, and reward the good-doers with the finest reward—
53|32|those who avoid major sins and shameful deeds, despite ˹stumbling on˺ minor sins. Surely your Lord is infinite in forgiveness. He knew well what would become of you as He created you from the earth and while you were ˹still˺ fetuses in the wombs of your mothers. So do not ˹falsely˺ elevate yourselves. He knows best who is ˹truly˺ righteous
53|33|Have you seen the one who turned away ˹from Islam,˺
53|34|and ˹initially˺ paid a little ˹for his salvation˺, and then stopped
53|35|Does he have the knowledge of the unseen so that he sees ˹the Hereafter˺
53|36|Or has he not been informed of what is in the Scripture of Moses
53|37|and ˹that of˺ Abraham, who ˹perfectly˺ fulfilled ˹his covenant˺
53|38|˹They state˺ that no soul burdened with sin will bear the burden of another
53|39|and that each person will only have what they endeavoured towards
53|40|and that ˹the outcome of˺ their endeavours will be seen ˹in their record˺
53|41|then they will be fully rewarded
53|42|and that to your Lord ˹alone˺ is the ultimate return ˹of all things˺
53|43|Moreover, He is the One Who brings about joy and sadness
53|44|And He is the One Who gives life and causes death
53|45|And He created the pairs—males and females—
53|46|from a sperm-drop when it is emitted
53|47|And it is upon Him to bring about re-creation
53|48|And He is the One Who enriches and impoverishes
53|49|And He alone is the Lord of Sirius
53|50|And He destroyed the first ˹people of˺ ’Ȃd
53|51|and ˹then˺ Thamûd, sparing no one
53|52|And before ˹that He destroyed˺ the people of Noah, who were truly far worse in wrongdoing and transgression
53|53|And ˹it was˺ He ˹Who˺ turned the cities ˹of Sodom and Gomorrah˺ upside down
53|54|How overwhelming was what covered ˹them˺
53|55|Now, which of your Lord’s favours will you dispute
53|56|This ˹Prophet˺ is a warner like earlier ones
53|57|The approaching ˹Hour˺ has drawn near
53|58|None but God can disclose it
53|59|Do you find this revelation astonishing
53|60|laughing ˹at it˺ and not weeping ˹in awe˺
53|61|while persisting in heedlessness
53|62|Instead, prostrate to God and worship ˹Him alone˺
54|1|The Hour has drawn near and the moon was split ˹in two˺
54|2|Yet, whenever they see a sign, they turn away, saying, “Same old magic!”
54|3|They rejected ˹the truth˺ and followed their own desires—and every matter will be settled—
54|4|even though the stories ˹of destroyed nations˺ that have already come to them are a sufficient deterrent
54|5|˹This Quran is˺ profound ˹in˺ wisdom, but warnings are of no benefit ˹to them˺
54|6|So turn away from them ˹O Prophet˺. ˹And wait for˺ the Day ˹when˺ the caller will summon ˹them˺ for something horrifying
54|7|With eyes downcast, they will come forth from the graves as if they were swarming locusts
54|8|rushing towards the caller. The disbelievers will cry, “This is a difficult Day!”
54|9|Before them, the people of Noah denied ˹the truth˺ and rejected Our servant, calling ˹him˺ insane. And he was intimidated
54|10|So he cried out to his Lord, “I am helpless, so help ˹me˺!”
54|11|So We opened the gates of the sky with pouring rain
54|12|and caused the earth to burst with springs, so the waters met for a fate already set
54|13|We carried him on that ˹Ark made˺ of planks and nails
54|14|sailing under Our ˹watchful˺ Eyes—a ˹fair˺ punishment on behalf of the one ˹they˺ denied
54|15|We certainly left this as a sign. So is there anyone who will be mindful
54|16|Then how ˹dreadful˺ were My punishment and warnings
54|17|And We have certainly made the Quran easy to remember. So is there anyone who will be mindful
54|18|’Ȃd ˹also˺ rejected ˹the truth˺. Then how ˹dreadful˺ were My punishment and warnings
54|19|Indeed, We sent against them a furious wind, on a day of unrelenting misery
54|20|that snatched people up, leaving them like trunks of uprooted palm trees
54|21|Then how ˹dreadful˺ were My punishment and warnings
54|22|And We have certainly made the Quran easy to remember. So is there anyone who will be mindful
54|23|Thamûd rejected the warnings ˹as well˺
54|24|arguing, “How can we follow one ˹average˺ human being from among us? We would then truly be misguided and insane
54|25|Has the revelation been sent down ˹only˺ to him out of ˹all of˺ us? In fact, he is a boastful liar.”
54|26|˹It was revealed to Ṣâliḥ,˺ “They will soon know who the boastful liar is
54|27|We are sending the she-camel as a test for them. So watch them ˹closely˺, and have patience
54|28|And tell them that the ˹drinking˺ water must be divided between them ˹and her˺, each taking a turn to drink ˹every other day˺.”
54|29|But they roused a companion of theirs, so he dared to kill ˹her˺
54|30|Then how ˹dreadful˺ were My punishment and warnings
54|31|Indeed, We sent against them ˹only˺ one ˹mighty˺ blast, leaving them like the twigs of fence-builders
54|32|And We have certainly made the Quran easy to remember. So is there anyone who will be mindful
54|33|The people of Lot ˹also˺ rejected the warnings
54|34|We unleashed upon them a storm of stones. As for ˹the believers of˺ Lot’s family, We delivered them before dawn
54|35|as a blessing from Us. This is how We reward whoever gives thanks
54|36|He had already warned them of Our ˹crushing˺ blow but they disputed the warnings
54|37|And they even demanded his angel-guests from him, so We blinded their eyes. ˹And they were told,˺ “Taste then My punishment and warnings!”
54|38|And indeed, by the early morning they were overwhelmed by an unrelenting torment
54|39|˹Again they were told,˺ “Taste now My punishment and warnings!”
54|40|And We have certainly made the Quran easy to remember. So is there anyone who will be mindful
54|41|And indeed, the warnings ˹also˺ came to the people of Pharaoh
54|42|˹But˺ they rejected all of Our signs, so We seized them with the ˹crushing˺ grip of the Almighty, Most Powerful
54|43|Now, are you ˹Meccan˺ disbelievers superior to those ˹destroyed peoples˺? Or have you ˹been granted˺ immunity ˹from punishment˺ in divine Books
54|44|Or do they say, “We are all ˹a˺ united ˹front˺, bound to prevail.”
54|45|˹Soon˺ their united front will be defeated and ˹forced to˺ flee
54|46|Better yet, the Hour is their appointed time—and the Hour will be most catastrophic and most bitter
54|47|Indeed, the wicked are ˹entrenched˺ in misguidance, and ˹are bound for˺ blazes
54|48|On the Day they will be dragged into the Fire on their faces, ˹they will be told,˺ “Taste the touch of Hell!”
54|49|Indeed, We have created everything, perfectly preordained
54|50|Our command is but a single word, done in the blink of an eye
54|51|We have already destroyed the likes of you. So will any ˹of you˺ be mindful
54|52|Everything they have done is ˹listed˺ in ˹their˺ records
54|53|Every matter, small and large, is written ˹precisely˺
54|54|Indeed, the righteous will be amid Gardens and rivers
54|55|at the Seat of Honour in the presence of the Most Powerful Sovereign
55|1|The Most Compassionate
55|2|taught the Quran
55|3|created humanity
55|4|˹and˺ taught them speech
55|5|The sun and the moon ˹travel˺ with precision
55|6|The stars and the trees bow down ˹in submission˺
55|7|As for the sky, He raised it ˹high˺, and set the balance ˹of justice˺
55|8|so that you do not defraud the scales
55|9|Weigh with justice, and do not give short measure
55|10|He laid out the earth for all beings
55|11|In it are fruit, palm trees with date stalks
55|12|and grain with husks, and aromatic plants
55|13|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you ˹humans and jinn˺ both deny
55|14|He created humankind from ˹sounding˺ clay like pottery
55|15|and created jinn from a ˹smokeless˺ flame of fire
55|16|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|17|˹He is˺ Lord of the two easts and the two wests
55|18|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|19|He merges the two bodies of ˹fresh and salt˺ water
55|20|yet between them is a barrier they never cross
55|21|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|22|Out of both ˹waters˺ come forth pearls and coral
55|23|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|24|To Him belong the ships with raised sails, sailing through the seas like mountains
55|25|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|26|Every being on earth is bound to perish
55|27|Only your Lord Himself, full of Majesty and Honour, will remain ˹forever˺
55|28|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|29|All those in the heavens and the earth are dependent on Him. Day in and day out He has something to bring about
55|30|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|31|We will soon attend to you ˹for judgment˺, O two multitudes ˹of jinn and humans˺
55|32|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|33|O assembly of jinn and humans! If you can penetrate beyond the realms of the heavens and the earth, then do so. ˹But˺ you cannot do that without ˹Our˺ authority
55|34|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|35|Flames of fire and ˹molten˺ copper will be sent against you, and you will not be able to defend one another
55|36|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|37|˹How horrible will it be˺ when the heavens will split apart, becoming rose-red like ˹burnt˺ oil
55|38|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|39|On that Day there will be no need for any human or jinn to be asked about their sins
55|40|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|41|The wicked will be recognized by their appearance, then will be seized by ˹their˺ forelocks and feet
55|42|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|43|˹They will be told,˺ “This is the Hell which the wicked denied.”
55|44|They will alternate between its flames and scalding water
55|45|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|46|And whoever is in awe of standing before their Lord will have two Gardens
55|47|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|48|˹Both will be˺ with lush branches
55|49|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|50|In each ˹Garden˺ will be two flowing springs
55|51|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|52|In each will be two types of every fruit
55|53|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|54|Those ˹believers˺ will recline on furnishings lined with rich brocade. And the fruit of both Gardens will hang within reach
55|55|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|56|In both ˹Gardens˺ will be maidens of modest gaze, who no human or jinn has ever touched before
55|57|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|58|Those ˹maidens˺ will be ˹as elegant˺ as rubies and coral
55|59|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|60|Is there any reward for goodness except goodness
55|61|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|62|And below these two ˹Gardens˺ will be two others
55|63|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|64|Both will be dark green
55|65|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|66|In each will be two gushing springs
55|67|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|68|In both will be fruit, palm trees, and pomegranates
55|69|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|70|In all Gardens will be noble, pleasant mates
55|71|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|72|˹They will be˺ maidens with gorgeous eyes, reserved in pavilions
55|73|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|74|No human or jinn has ever touched these ˹maidens˺ before
55|75|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|76|All ˹believers˺ will be reclining on green cushions and splendid carpets
55|77|Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny
55|78|Blessed is the Name of your Lord, full of Majesty and Honour
56|1|When the Inevitable Event takes place
56|2|then no one can deny it has come
56|3|It will debase ˹some˺ and elevate ˹others˺
56|4|When the earth will be violently shaken
56|5|and the mountains will be crushed to pieces
56|6|becoming scattered ˹particles of˺ dust
56|7|you will ˹all˺ be ˹divided into˺ three groups
56|8|the people of the right, how ˹blessed˺ will they be
56|9|the people of the left, how ˹miserable˺ will they be
56|10|and the foremost ˹in faith˺ will be the foremost ˹in Paradise˺
56|11|They are the ones nearest ˹to God˺
56|12|in the Gardens of Bliss
56|13|˹They will be˺ a multitude from earlier generations
56|14|and a few from later generations
56|15|˹All will be˺ on jewelled thrones
56|16|reclining face to face
56|17|They will be waited on by eternal youths
56|18|with cups, pitchers, and a drink ˹of pure wine˺ from a flowing stream
56|19|that will cause them neither headache nor intoxication
56|20|˹They will also be served˺ any fruit they choose
56|21|and meat from any bird they desire
56|22|And ˹they will have˺ maidens with gorgeous eyes
56|23|like pristine pearls
56|24|˹all˺ as a reward for what they used to do
56|25|There they will never hear any idle or sinful talk—
56|26|only good and virtuous speech
56|27|And the people of the right—how ˹blessed˺ will they be
56|28|˹They will be˺ amid thornless lote trees
56|29|clusters of bananas
56|30|extended shade
56|31|flowing water
56|32|abundant fruit—
56|33|never out of season nor forbidden—
56|34|and elevated furnishings
56|35|Indeed, We will have perfectly created their mates
56|36|making them virgins
56|37|loving and of equal age
56|38|for the people of the right
56|39|˹who will be˺ a multitude from earlier generations
56|40|and a multitude from later generations
56|41|And the people of the left—how ˹miserable˺ will they be
56|42|˹They will be˺ in scorching heat and boiling water
56|43|in the shade of black smoke
56|44|neither cool nor refreshing
56|45|Indeed, before this ˹torment˺ they were spoiled by luxury
56|46|and persisted in the worst of sin
56|47|They used to ask ˹mockingly˺, “When we are dead and reduced to dust and bones, will we really be resurrected
56|48|And our forefathers as well?”
56|49|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Most certainly, earlier and later generations
56|50|will surely be gathered ˹together˺ for the appointed Day
56|51|Then you, O misguided deniers
56|52|will certainly eat from ˹the fruit of˺ the trees of Zaqqûm
56|53|filling up ˹your˺ bellies with it
56|54|Then on top of that you will drink boiling water—
56|55|and you will drink ˹it˺ like thirsty camels do.”
56|56|This will be their accommodation on the Day of Judgment
56|57|It is We Who created you. Will you not then believe ˹in resurrection˺
56|58|Have you considered what you ejaculate
56|59|Is it you who create ˹a child out of˺ it, or is it We Who do so
56|60|We have ordained death for ˹all of˺ you, and We cannot be prevented
56|61|from transforming and recreating you in forms unknown to you
56|62|You already know how you were first created. Will you not then be mindful
56|63|Have you considered what you sow
56|64|Is it you who cause it to grow, or is it We Who do so
56|65|If We willed, We could simply reduce this ˹harvest˺ to chaff, leaving you to lament
56|66|“We have truly suffered a ˹great˺ loss
56|67|In fact, we have been deprived ˹of our livelihood˺.”
56|68|Have you considered the water you drink
56|69|Is it you who bring it down from the clouds, or is it We Who do so
56|70|If We willed, We could make it salty. Will you not then give thanks
56|71|Have you considered the fire you kindle
56|72|Is it you who produce its trees, or is it We Who do so
56|73|We have made it ˹as˺ a reminder ˹of the Hellfire˺ and a provision for the travellers
56|74|So glorify the Name of your Lord, the Greatest
56|75|So I do swear by the positions of the stars—
56|76|and this, if only you knew, is indeed a great oath—
56|77|that this is truly a noble Quran
56|78|in a well-preserved Record
56|79|touched by none except the purified ˹angels˺
56|80|˹It is˺ a revelation from the Lord of all worlds
56|81|How can you then take this message lightly
56|82|and repay ˹God for˺ your provisions with denial
56|83|Why then ˹are you helpless˺ when the soul ˹of a dying person˺ reaches ˹their˺ throat
56|84|while you are looking on
56|85|And We are nearer to such a person than you, but you cannot see
56|86|Now, if you are not subject to Our Will ˹as you claim˺
56|87|bring that soul back, if what you say is true
56|88|So, if the deceased is one of those brought near ˹to Us˺
56|89|then ˹such a person will have˺ serenity, fragrance, and a Garden of Bliss
56|90|And if the deceased is one of the people of the right
56|91|then ˹they will be told,˺ “Greetings to you from the people of the right.”
56|92|But if such person is one of the misguided deniers
56|93|then their accommodation will be boiling water ˹to drink˺
56|94|and burning in Hellfire
56|95|Indeed, this is the absolute truth
56|96|So glorify the Name of your Lord, the Greatest
57|1|Whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies God, for He is the Almighty, All-Wise
57|2|To Him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He gives life and causes death. And He is Most Capable of everything
57|3|He is the First and the Last, the Most High and Most Near, and He has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all things
57|4|He is the One Who created the heavens and the earth in six Days, then established Himself on the Throne. He knows whatever goes into the earth and whatever comes out of it, and whatever descends from the sky and whatever ascends into it. And He is with you wherever you are. For God is All-Seeing of what you do
57|5|To Him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. And to God all matters are returned
57|6|He merges the night into day and the day into night. And He knows best what is ˹hidden˺ in the heart
57|7|Believe in God and His Messenger, and donate from what He has entrusted you with. So those of you who believe and donate will have a mighty reward
57|8|Why do you not believe in God while the Messenger is inviting you to have faith in your Lord, although He has already taken your covenant, if you will ever believe
57|9|He is the One Who sends down clear revelations to His servant to bring you out of darkness and into light. For indeed God is Ever Gracious and Most Merciful to you
57|10|And why should you not spend in the cause of God, while God is the ˹sole˺ inheritor of the heavens and the earth? Those of you who donated and fought before the victory ˹over Mecca˺ are unparalleled. They are far greater in rank than those who donated and fought afterwards. Yet God has promised each a fine reward. And God is All-Aware of what you do
57|11|Who is it that will lend to God a good loan which God will multiply ˹many times over˺ for them, and they will have an honourable reward
57|12|On that Day you will see believing men and women with their light shining ahead of them and on their right. ˹They will be told,˺ “Today you have good news of Gardens, under which rivers flow, ˹for you˺ to stay in forever. This is ˹truly˺ the ultimate triumph.”
57|13|On that Day hypocrite men and women will beg the believers, “Wait for us so that we may have some of your light.” It will be said ˹mockingly˺, “Go back ˹to the world˺ and seek a light ˹there˺!” Then a ˹separating˺ wall with a gate will be erected between them. On the near side will be grace and on the far side will be torment
57|14|The tormented will cry out to those graced, “Were we not with you?” They will reply, “Yes ˹you were˺. But you chose to be tempted ˹by hypocrisy˺, ˹eagerly˺ awaited ˹our demise˺, doubted ˹the truth˺, and were deluded by false hopes until God’s decree ˹of your death˺ came to pass. And ˹so˺ the Chief Deceiver deceived you about God
57|15|So Today no ransom will be accepted from you ˹hypocrites˺, nor from the disbelievers. Your home is the Fire—it is the ˹only˺ fitting place for you. What an evil destination!”
57|16|Has the time not yet come for believers’ hearts to be humbled at the remembrance of God and what has been revealed of the truth, and not be like those given the Scripture before—˹those˺ who were spoiled for so long that their hearts became hardened. And many of them are ˹still˺ rebellious
57|17|Know that God revives the earth after its death. We have certainly made the signs clear for you so perhaps you will understand
57|18|Indeed, those men and women who give in charity and lend to God a good loan will have it multiplied for them, and they will have an honourable reward
57|19|˹As for˺ those who believe in God and His messengers, it is they who are ˹truly˺ the people of truth. And the martyrs, with their Lord, will have their reward and their light. But ˹as for˺ those who disbelieve and reject Our signs, it is they who will be the residents of the Hellfire
57|20|Know that this worldly life is no more than play, amusement, luxury, mutual boasting, and competition in wealth and children. This is like rain that causes plants to grow, to the delight of the planters. But later the plants dry up and you see them wither, then they are reduced to chaff. And in the Hereafter there will be either severe punishment or forgiveness and pleasure of God, whereas the life of this world is no more than the delusion of enjoyment
57|21|˹So˺ compete with one another for forgiveness from your Lord and a Paradise as vast as the heavens and the earth, prepared for those who believe in God and His messengers. This is the favour of God. He grants it to whoever He wills. And God is the Lord of infinite bounty
57|22|No calamity ˹or blessing˺ occurs on earth or in yourselves without being ˹written˺ in a Record before We bring it into being. This is certainly easy for God
57|23|˹We let you know this˺ so that you neither grieve over what you have missed nor boast over what He has granted you. For God does not like whoever is arrogant, boastful—
57|24|those who are stingy and promote stinginess among people. And whoever turns away ˹should know that˺ God ˹alone˺ is truly the Self-Sufficient, Praiseworthy
57|25|Indeed, We sent Our messengers with clear proofs, and with them We sent down the Scripture and the balance ˹of justice˺ so that people may administer justice. And We sent down iron with its great might, benefits for humanity, and means for God to prove who ˹is willing to˺ stand up for Him and His messengers without seeing Him. Surely God is All-Powerful, Almighty
57|26|And indeed, We sent Noah and Abraham and reserved prophethood and revelation for their descendants. Some of them are ˹rightly˺ guided, while most are rebellious
57|27|Then in the footsteps of these ˹prophets˺, We sent Our messengers, and ˹after them˺ We sent Jesus, son of Mary, and granted him the Gospel, and instilled compassion and mercy into the hearts of his followers. As for monasticism, they made it up—We never ordained it for them—only seeking to please God, yet they did not ˹even˺ observe it strictly. So We rewarded those of them who were faithful. But most of them are rebellious
57|28|O people of faith! Fear God and believe in His Messenger. ˹And˺ He will grant you a double share of His mercy, provide you with a light to walk in ˹on Judgment Day˺, and forgive you. For God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
57|29|˹This is so˺ that the People of the Book ˹who deny the Prophet˺ may know that they do not have any control over God’s grace, and that all grace is in God’s Hands. He grants it to whoever He wills. For God is the Lord of infinite bounty
58|1|Indeed, God has heard the argument of the woman who pleaded with you ˹O Prophet˺ concerning her husband, and appealed to God. God has heard your exchange. Surely God is All-Hearing, All-Seeing
58|2|Those of you who ˹sinfully˺ divorce their wives by comparing them to their mothers ˹should know that˺ their wives are in no way their mothers. None can be their mothers except those who gave birth to them. What they say is certainly detestable and false. Yet God is truly Ever-Pardoning, All-Forgiving
58|3|Those who divorce their wives in this manner, then ˹wish to˺ retract what they said, must free a slave before they touch each other. This ˹penalty˺ is meant to deter you. And God is All-Aware of what you do
58|4|But if the husband cannot afford this, let him then fast two consecutive months before the couple touch each other. But if he is unable ˹to fast˺, then let him feed sixty poor people. This is to re-affirm your faith in God and His Messenger. These are the limits set by God. And the disbelievers will suffer a painful punishment
58|5|Indeed, those who defy God and His Messenger will be debased, just like those before them. We have certainly sent down clear revelations. And the disbelievers will suffer a humiliating punishment
58|6|On the Day God resurrects them all together, He will then inform them of what they have done. God has kept account of it all, while they have forgotten it. For God is a Witness over all things
58|7|Do you not see that God knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth? If three converse privately, He is their fourth. If five, He is their sixth. Whether fewer or more, He is with them wherever they may be. Then, on the Day of Judgment, He will inform them of what they have done. Surely God has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all things
58|8|Have you not seen those who were forbidden from secret talks, yet they ˹always˺ return to what they were forbidden from, conspiring in sin, aggression, and disobedience to the Messenger? And when they come to you ˹O Prophet˺, they greet you not as God greets you, and say to one another, “Why does God not punish us for what we say?” Hell is enough for them—they will burn in it. And what an evil destination
58|9|O believers! When you converse privately, let it not be for sin, aggression, or disobedience to the Messenger, but let it be for goodness and righteousness. And fear God, to Whom you will ˹all˺ be gathered
58|10|Secret talks are only inspired by Satan to grieve the believers. Yet he cannot harm them whatsoever except by God’s Will. So in God let the believers put their trust
58|11|O believers! When you are told to make room in gatherings, then do so. God will make room for you ˹in His grace˺. And if you are told to rise, then do so. God will elevate those of you who are faithful, and ˹raise˺ those gifted with knowledge in rank. And God is All-Aware of what you do
58|12|O believers! When you consult the Messenger privately, give something in charity before your consultation. That is better and purer for you. But if you lack the means, then God is truly All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
58|13|Are you afraid of spending in charity before your private consultations ˹with him˺? Since you are unable to do so, and God has turned to you in mercy, then ˹continue to˺ establish prayer, pay alms-tax, and obey God and His Messenger. And God is All-Aware of what you do
58|14|Have you not seen those ˹hypocrites˺ who ally themselves with a people with whom God is displeased? They are neither with you nor with them. And they swear to lies knowingly
58|15|God has prepared for them a severe punishment. Evil indeed is what they do
58|16|They have made their ˹false˺ oaths as a shield, hindering ˹others˺ from the cause of God. So they will suffer a humiliating punishment
58|17|Neither their wealth nor children will be of any help to them against God whatsoever. It is they who will be the residents of the Fire. They will be there forever
58|18|On the Day God resurrects them all, they will ˹falsely˺ swear to Him as they swear to you, thinking they have something to stand on. Indeed, it is they who are the ˹total˺ liars
58|19|Satan has taken hold of them, causing them to forget the remembrance of God. They are the party of Satan. Surely Satan’s party is bound to lose
58|20|˹As for˺ those who defy God and His Messenger, they will definitely be among the most debased
58|21|God has decreed, “I and My messengers will certainly prevail.” Surely God is All-Powerful, Almighty
58|22|You will never find a people who ˹truly˺ believe in God and the Last Day loyal to those who defy God and His Messenger, even if they were their parents, children, siblings, or extended family. For those ˹believers˺, God has instilled faith in their hearts and strengthened them with a spirit from Him. He will admit them into Gardens under which rivers flow, to stay there forever. God is pleased with them and they are pleased with Him. They are the party of God. Indeed, God’s party is bound to succeed
59|1|Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth glorifies God. For He is the Almighty, All-Wise
59|2|He is the One Who expelled the disbelievers of the People of the Book from their homes for ˹their˺ first banishment ˹ever˺. You never thought they would go. And they thought their strongholds would put them out of God’s reach. But ˹the decree of˺ God came upon them from where they never expected. And He cast horror into their hearts so they destroyed their houses with their own hands and the hands of the believers. So take a lesson ˹from this˺, O people of insight
59|3|Had God not decreed exile for them, He would have certainly punished them in this world. And in the Hereafter they will suffer the punishment of the Fire
59|4|This is because they defied God and His Messenger. And whoever defies God, then God is truly severe in punishment
59|5|Whatever palm trees you ˹believers˺ cut down or left standing intact, it was ˹all˺ by God’s Will, so that He might disgrace the rebellious
59|6|As for the gains God has turned over to His Messenger from them—you did not ˹even˺ spur on any horse or camel for such gains. But God gives authority to His messengers over whoever He wills. For God is Most Capable of everything
59|7|As for gains granted by God to His Messenger from the people of ˹other˺ lands, they are for God and the Messenger, his close relatives, orphans, the poor, and ˹needy˺ travellers so that wealth may not merely circulate among your rich. Whatever the Messenger gives you, take it. And whatever he forbids you from, leave it. And fear God. Surely God is severe in punishment
59|8|˹Some of the gains will be˺ for poor emigrants who were driven out of their homes and wealth, seeking God’s bounty and pleasure, and standing up for God and His Messenger. They are the ones true in faith
59|9|As for those who had settled in the city and ˹embraced˺ the faith before ˹the arrival of˺ the emigrants, they love whoever immigrates to them, never having a desire in their hearts for whatever ˹of the gains˺ is given to the emigrants. They give ˹the emigrants˺ preference over themselves even though they may be in need. And whoever is saved from the selfishness of their own souls, it is they who are ˹truly˺ successful
59|10|And those who come after them will pray, “Our Lord! Forgive us and our fellow believers who preceded us in faith, and do not allow bitterness into our hearts towards those who believe. Our Lord! Indeed, You are Ever Gracious, Most Merciful.”
59|11|Have you ˹O Prophet˺ not seen the hypocrites who say to their fellow disbelievers from the People of the Book, “If you are expelled, we will certainly leave with you, and We will never obey anyone against you. And if you are fought against, we will surely help you.”? But God bears witness that they are truly liars
59|12|Indeed, if they are expelled, the hypocrites will never leave with them. And if they are fought against, the hypocrites will never help them. And even if the hypocrites did so, they would certainly flee, then the disbelievers would be left with no help
59|13|Indeed, there is more fear in their hearts for you ˹believers˺ than for God. That is because they are a people who do not comprehend
59|14|Even united, they would not ˹dare˺ fight against you except ˹from˺ within fortified strongholds or from behind walls. Their malice for each other is intense: you think they are united, yet their hearts are divided. That is because they are a people with no ˹real˺ understanding
59|15|They are ˹both just˺ like those who recently went down before them: they tasted the evil consequences of their doings. And they will suffer a painful punishment
59|16|˹They are˺ like Satan when he lures someone to disbelieve. Then after they have done so, he will say ˹on Judgment Day˺, “I have absolutely nothing to do with you. I truly fear God—the Lord of all worlds.”
59|17|So they will both end up in the Fire, staying there forever. That is the reward of the wrongdoers
59|18|O believers! Be mindful of God and let every soul look to what ˹deeds˺ it has sent forth for tomorrow. And fear God, ˹for˺ certainly God is All-Aware of what you do
59|19|And do not be like those who forgot God, so He made them forget themselves. It is they who are ˹truly˺ rebellious
59|20|The residents of the Fire cannot be equal to the residents of Paradise. ˹Only˺ the residents of Paradise will be successful
59|21|Had We sent down this Quran upon a mountain, you would have certainly seen it humbled and torn apart in awe of God. We set forth such comparisons for people, ˹so˺ perhaps they may reflect
59|22|He is God—there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him: Knower of the seen and unseen. He is the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful
59|23|He is God—there is no god except Him: the King, the Most Holy, the All-Perfect, the Source of Serenity, the Watcher ˹of all˺, the Almighty, the Supreme in Might, the Majestic. Glorified is God far above what they associate with Him ˹in worship˺
59|24|He is God: the Creator, the Inventor, the Shaper. He ˹alone˺ has the Most Beautiful Names. Whatever is in the heavens and the earth ˹constantly˺ glorifies Him. And He is the Almighty, All-Wise
60|1|O believers! Do not take My enemies and yours as trusted allies, showing them affection even though they deny what has come to you of the truth. They drove the Messenger and yourselves out ˹of Mecca˺, simply for your belief in God, your Lord. If you ˹truly˺ emigrated to struggle in My cause and seek My pleasure, ˹then do not take them as allies,˺ disclosing secrets ˹of the believers˺ to the pagans out of affection for them, when I know best whatever you conceal and whatever you reveal. And whoever of you does this has truly strayed from the Right Way
60|2|If they gain the upper hand over you, they would be your ˹open˺ enemies, unleashing their hands and tongues to harm you, and wishing that you would abandon faith
60|3|Neither your relatives nor children will benefit you on Judgment Day—He will decide between you ˹all˺. For God is All-Seeing of what you do
60|4|You already have an excellent example in Abraham and those with him, when they said to their people, “We totally dissociate ourselves from you and ˹shun˺ whatever ˹idols˺ you worship besides God. We reject you. The enmity and hatred that has arisen between us and you will last until you believe in God alone.” The only exception is when Abraham said to his father, “I will seek forgiveness for you,˹” adding, “but˺ I cannot protect you from God at all.” ˹The believers prayed,˺ “Our Lord! In You we trust. And to You we ˹always˺ turn. And to You is the final return
60|5|Our Lord! Do not subject us to the persecution of the disbelievers. Forgive us, our Lord! You ˹alone˺ are truly the Almighty, All-Wise.”
60|6|You certainly have an excellent example in them for whoever has hope in God and the Last Day. But whoever turns away, then surely God ˹alone˺ is the Self-Sufficient, Praiseworthy
60|7|˹In time,˺ God may bring about goodwill between you and those of them you ˹now˺ hold as enemies. For God is Most Capable. And God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
60|8|God does not forbid you from dealing kindly and fairly with those who have neither fought nor driven you out of your homes. Surely God loves those who are fair
60|9|God only forbids you from befriending those who have fought you for ˹your˺ faith, driven you out of your homes, or supported ˹others˺ in doing so. And whoever takes them as friends, then it is they who are the ˹true˺ wrongdoers
60|10|O believers! When the believing women come to you as emigrants, test their intentions—their faith is best known to God—and if you find them to be believers, then do not send them back to the disbelievers. These ˹women˺ are not lawful ˹wives˺ for the disbelievers, nor are the disbelievers lawful ˹husbands˺ for them. ˹But˺ repay the disbelievers whatever ˹dowries˺ they had paid. And there is no blame on you if you marry these ˹women˺ as long as you pay them their dowries. And do not hold on to marriage with polytheistic women. ˹But˺ demand ˹repayment of˺ whatever ˹dowries˺ you had paid, and let the disbelievers do the same. That is the judgment of God—He judges between you. And God is All-Knowing, All-Wise
60|11|And if any of your wives desert you to the disbelievers, and later you take spoils from them, then pay those whose wives have gone, the equivalent of whatever ˹dowry˺ they had paid. And be mindful of God, in Whom you believe
60|12|O Prophet! When the believing women come to you, pledging to you that they will neither associate anything with God ˹in worship˺, nor steal, nor fornicate, nor kill their children, nor falsely attribute ˹illegitimate˺ children to their husbands, nor disobey you in what is right, then accept their pledge, and ask God to forgive them. Surely God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
60|13|O believers! Do not ally yourselves with a people God is displeased with. They already have no hope for the Hereafter, just like the disbelievers lying in ˹their˺ graves
61|1|Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth glorifies God. For He ˹alone˺ is the Almighty, All-Wise
61|2|O believers! Why do you say what you do not do
61|3|How despicable it is in the sight of God that you say what you do not do
61|4|Surely God loves those who fight in His cause in ˹solid˺ ranks as if they were one concrete structure
61|5|˹Remember, O Prophet,˺ when Moses said to his people, “O my people! Why do you hurt me when you already know I am God’s messenger to you?” So when they ˹persistently˺ deviated, God caused their hearts to deviate. For God does not guide the rebellious people
61|6|And ˹remember˺ when Jesus, son of Mary, said, “O children of Israel! I am truly God’s messenger to you, confirming the Torah which came before me, and giving good news of a messenger after me whose name will be Aḥmad.” Yet when the Prophet came to them with clear proofs, they said, “This is pure magic.”
61|7|Who does more wrong than the one who fabricates lies about God when invited to submit ˹to Him˺? For God does not guide the wrongdoing people
61|8|They wish to extinguish God’s light with their mouths, but God will ˹certainly˺ perfect His light, even to the dismay of the disbelievers
61|9|He is the One Who has sent His Messenger with ˹true˺ guidance and the religion of truth, making it prevail over all others, even to the dismay of the polytheists
61|10|O believers! Shall I guide you to an exchange that will save you from a painful punishment
61|11|˹It is to˺ have faith in God and His Messenger, and strive in the cause of God with your wealth and your lives. That is best for you, if only you knew
61|12|He will forgive your sins, and admit you into Gardens under which rivers flow, and ˹house you in˺ splendid homes in the Gardens of Eternity. That is the ultimate triumph
61|13|˹He will also give you˺ another favour that you long for: help from God and an imminent victory. ˹So˺ give good news ˹O Prophet˺ to the believers
61|14|O believers! Stand up for God, as Jesus, son of Mary, asked the disciples, “Who will stand up with me for God?” The disciples replied, “We will stand up for God.” Then a group from the Children of Israel believed while another disbelieved. We then supported the believers against their enemies, so they prevailed
62|1|Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth ˹constantly˺ glorifies God—the King, the Most Holy, the Almighty, the All-Wise
62|2|He is the One Who raised for the illiterate ˹people˺ a messenger from among themselves—reciting to them His revelations, purifying them, and teaching them the Book and wisdom, for indeed they had previously been clearly astray—
62|3|along with others of them who have not yet joined them ˹in faith˺. For He is the Almighty, All-Wise
62|4|This is the favour of God. He grants it to whoever He wills. And God is the Lord of infinite bounty
62|5|The example of those who were entrusted with ˹observing˺ the Torah but failed to do so, is that of a donkey carrying books. How evil is the example of those who reject God’s signs! For God does not guide the wrongdoing people
62|6|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “O Jews! If you claim to be God’s chosen ˹people˺ out of all humanity, then wish for death, if what you say is true.”
62|7|But they will never wish for that because of what their hands have done. And God has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of the wrongdoers
62|8|Say, “The death you are running away from will inevitably come to you. Then you will be returned to the Knower of the seen and unseen, and He will inform you of what you used to do.”
62|9|O believers! When the call to prayer is made on Friday, then proceed ˹diligently˺ to the remembrance of God and leave off ˹your˺ business. That is best for you, if only you knew
62|10|Once the prayer is over, disperse throughout the land and seek the bounty of God. And remember God often so you may be successful
62|11|When they saw the fanfare along with the caravan, they ˹almost all˺ flocked to it, leaving you ˹O Prophet˺ standing ˹on the pulpit˺. Say, “What is with God is far better than amusement and merchandise. And God is the Best Provider.”
63|1|When the hypocrites come to you ˹O Prophet˺, they say, “We bear witness that you are certainly the Messenger of God”—and surely God knows that you are His Messenger—but God bears witness that the hypocrites are truly liars
63|2|They have made their ˹false˺ oaths as a shield, hindering ˹others˺ from the Way of God. Evil indeed is what they do
63|3|This is because they believed and then abandoned faith. Therefore, their hearts have been sealed, so they do not comprehend
63|4|When you see them, their appearance impresses you. And when they speak, you listen to their ˹impressive˺ speech. But they are ˹just˺ like ˹worthless˺ planks of wood leaned ˹against a wall˺. They think every cry is against them. They are the enemy, so beware of them. May God condemn them! How can they be deluded ˹from the truth˺
63|5|When it is said to them, “Come! The Messenger of God will pray for you to be forgiven,” they turn their heads ˹in disgust˺, and you see them ˹O Prophet˺ turn away in arrogance
63|6|It is the same whether you pray for their forgiveness or not, God will not forgive them. Surely God does not guide the rebellious people
63|7|They are the ones who say ˹to one another˺, “Do not spend ˹anything˺ on those ˹emigrants˺ with the Messenger of God so that they will break away ˹from him˺.” But to God ˹alone˺ belong the treasuries of the heavens and the earth, yet the hypocrites do not comprehend
63|8|They say, “If we return to Medina, the honourable will definitely expel the inferior.” But all honour and power belongs to God, His Messenger, and the believers, yet the hypocrites do not know
63|9|O believers! Do not let your wealth or your children divert you from the remembrance of God. For whoever does so, it is they who are the ˹true˺ losers
63|10|And donate from what We have provided for you before death comes to one of you, and you cry, “My Lord! If only You delayed me for a short while, I would give in charity and be one of the righteous.”
63|11|But God never delays a soul when its appointed time comes. And God is All-Aware of what you do
64|1|Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth ˹constantly˺ glorifies God. The kingdom is His, and all praise is for Him. For He is Most Capable of everything
64|2|He is the One Who created you, yet some of you are disbelievers while some are believers. And God is All-Seeing of what you do
64|3|He created the heavens and the earth for a purpose. He shaped you ˹in the womb˺, perfecting your form. And to Him is the final return
64|4|He knows whatever is in the heavens and the earth. And He knows whatever you conceal and whatever you reveal. For God knows best what is ˹hidden˺ in the heart
64|5|Have the stories of those who disbelieved before not reached you ˹pagans˺? They tasted the evil consequences of their doings, and they will suffer a painful punishment
64|6|That was because their messengers used to come to them with clear proofs, but they said ˹mockingly˺, “How can humans be our guides?” So they persisted in disbelief and turned away. And God was not in need ˹of their faith˺. For God is Self-Sufficient, Praiseworthy
64|7|The disbelievers claim they will not be resurrected. Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Yes, by my Lord, you will surely be resurrected, then you will certainly be informed of what you have done. And that is easy for God.”
64|8|So believe in God and His Messenger and in the Light We have revealed. And God is All-Aware of what you do
64|9|˹Consider˺ the Day He will gather you ˹all˺ for the Day of Gathering—that will be the Day of mutual loss and gain. So whoever believes in God and does good, He will absolve them of their sins and admit them into Gardens under which rivers flow, to stay there for ever and ever. That is the ultimate triumph
64|10|As for those who disbelieve and reject Our revelations, they will be the residents of the Fire, staying there forever. What an evil destination
64|11|No calamity befalls ˹anyone˺ except by God’s Will. And whoever has faith in God, He will ˹rightly˺ guide their hearts ˹through adversity˺. And God has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all things
64|12|Obey God and obey the Messenger! But if you turn away, then Our Messenger’s duty is only to deliver ˹the message˺ clearly
64|13|God—there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him. So in God let the believers put their trust
64|14|O believers! Indeed, some of your spouses and children are enemies to you, so beware of them. But if you pardon, overlook, and forgive ˹their faults˺, then God is truly All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
64|15|Your wealth and children are only a test, but God ˹alone˺ has a great reward
64|16|So be mindful of God to the best of your ability, hear and obey, and spend in charity—that will be best for you. And whoever is saved from the selfishness of their own souls, it is they who are ˹truly˺ successful
64|17|If you lend to God a good loan, He will multiply it for you and forgive you. For God is Most Appreciative, Most Forbearing
64|18|˹He is the˺ Knower of the seen and unseen—the Almighty, All-Wise
65|1|O Prophet! ˹Instruct the believers:˺ When you ˹intend to˺ divorce women, then divorce them with concern for their waiting period, and count it accurately. And fear God, your Lord. Do not force them out of their homes, nor should they leave—unless they commit a blatant misconduct. These are the limits set by God. And whoever transgresses God’s limits has truly wronged his own soul. You never know, perhaps God will bring about a change ˹of heart˺ later
65|2|Then when they have ˹almost˺ reached the end of their waiting period, either retain them honourably or separate from them honourably. And call two of your reliable men to witness ˹either way˺—and ˹let the witnesses˺ bear true testimony for ˹the sake of˺ God. This is enjoined on whoever has faith in God and the Last Day. And whoever is mindful of God, He will make a way out for them
65|3|and provide for them from sources they could never imagine. And whoever puts their trust in God, then He ˹alone˺ is sufficient for them. Certainly God achieves His Will. God has already set a destiny for everything
65|4|As for your women past the age of menstruation, in case you do not know, their waiting period is three months, and those who have not menstruated as well. As for those who are pregnant, their waiting period ends with delivery. And whoever is mindful of God, He will make their matters easy for them
65|5|This is the commandment of God, which He has revealed to you. And whoever is mindful of God, He will absolve them of their sins and reward them immensely
65|6|Let them live where you live ˹during their waiting period˺, according to your means. And do not harass them to make their stay unbearable. If they are pregnant, then maintain them until they deliver. And if they nurse your child, compensate them, and consult together courteously. But if you fail to reach an agreement, then another woman will nurse ˹the child˺ for the father
65|7|Let the man of wealth provide according to his means. As for the one with limited resources, let him provide according to whatever God has given him. God does not require of any soul beyond what He has given it. After hardship, God will bring about ease
65|8|˹Imagine˺ how many societies rebelled against the commandments of their Lord and His messengers, so We called each ˹society˺ to a severe account and subjected them to a horrible punishment
65|9|So they tasted the evil consequences of their doings, and the outcome of their doings was ˹total˺ loss
65|10|God has ˹also˺ prepared for them a severe punishment. So fear God, O people of reason and faith. God has indeed revealed to you a Reminder
65|11|˹and sent˺ a messenger reciting to you God’s revelations, making things clear so that He may bring those who believe and do good out of darkness and into light. And whoever believes in God and does good will be admitted by Him into Gardens under which rivers flow, to stay there for ever and ever. God will have indeed granted them an excellent provision
65|12|God is the One Who created seven heavens ˹in layers˺, and likewise for the earth. The ˹divine˺ command descends between them so you may know that God is Most Capable of everything and that God certainly encompasses all things in ˹His˺ knowledge
66|1|O Prophet! Why do you prohibit ˹yourself˺ from what God has made lawful to you, seeking to please your wives? And God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
66|2|God has already ordained for you ˹believers˺ the way to absolve yourselves from your oaths. For God is your Guardian. And He is the All-Knowing, All-Wise
66|3|˹Remember˺ when the Prophet had ˹once˺ confided something to one of his wives, then when she disclosed it ˹to another wife˺ and God made it known to him, he presented ˹to her˺ part of what was disclosed and overlooked a part. So when he informed her of it, she exclaimed, “Who told you this?” He replied, “I was informed by the All-Knowing, All-Aware.”
66|4|˹It will be better˺ if you ˹wives˺ both turn to God in repentance, for your hearts have certainly faltered. But if you ˹continue to˺ collaborate against him, then ˹know that˺ God Himself is his Guardian. And Gabriel, the righteous believers, and the angels are ˹all˺ his supporters as well
66|5|Perhaps, if he were to divorce you ˹all˺, his Lord would replace you with better wives who are submissive ˹to God˺, faithful ˹to Him˺, devout, repentant, dedicated to worship and fasting—previously married or virgins
66|6|O believers! Protect yourselves and your families from a Fire whose fuel is people and stones, overseen by formidable and severe angels, who never disobey whatever God orders—always doing as commanded
66|7|˹The deniers will then be told,˺ “O disbelievers! Make no excuses this Day! You are only rewarded for what you used to do.”
66|8|O believers! Turn to God in sincere repentance, so your Lord may absolve you of your sins and admit you into Gardens, under which rivers flow, on the Day God will not disgrace the Prophet or the believers with him. Their light will shine ahead of them and on their right. They will say, “Our Lord! Perfect our light for us, and forgive us. ˹For˺ You are truly Most Capable of everything.”
66|9|O Prophet! Struggle against the disbelievers and the hypocrites, and be firm with them. Hell will be their home. What an evil destination
66|10|God sets forth an example for the disbelievers: the wife of Noah and the wife of Lot. Each was married to one of Our righteous servants, yet betrayed them. So their husbands were of no benefit to them against God whatsoever. Both were told, “Enter the Fire, along with the others!”
66|11|And God sets forth an example for the believers: the wife of Pharaoh, who prayed, “My Lord! Build me a house in Paradise near You, deliver me from Pharaoh and his ˹evil˺ doing, and save me from the wrongdoing people.”
66|12|˹There is˺ also ˹the example of˺ Mary, the daughter of ’Imrân, who guarded her chastity, so We breathed into her ˹womb˺ through Our angel ˹Gabriel˺. She testified to the words of her Lord and His Scriptures, and was one of the ˹sincerely˺ devout
67|1|Blessed is the One in Whose Hands rests all authority. And He is Most Capable of everything
67|2|˹He is the One˺ Who created death and life in order to test which of you is best in deeds. And He is the Almighty, All-Forgiving
67|3|˹He is the One˺ Who created seven heavens, one above the other. You will never see any imperfection in the creation of the Most Compassionate. So look again: do you see any flaws
67|4|Then look again and again—your sight will return frustrated and weary
67|5|And indeed, We adorned the lowest heaven with ˹stars like˺ lamps, and made them ˹as missiles˺ for stoning ˹eavesdropping˺ devils, for whom We have also prepared the torment of the Blaze
67|6|Those who disbelieve in their Lord will suffer the punishment of Hell. What an evil destination
67|7|When they are tossed into it, they will hear its roaring as it boils over
67|8|almost bursting in fury. Every time a group is cast into it, its keepers will ask them, “Did a warner not come to you?”
67|9|They will reply, “Yes, a warner did come to us, but we denied and said, ‘God has revealed nothing. You are extremely astray.’”
67|10|And they will lament, “If only we had listened and reasoned, we would not be among the residents of the Blaze!”
67|11|And so they will confess their sins. So away with the residents of the Blaze
67|12|Indeed, those in awe of their Lord without seeing Him will have forgiveness and a mighty reward
67|13|Whether you speak secretly or openly—He surely knows best what is ˹hidden˺ in the heart
67|14|How could He not know His Own creation? For He ˹alone˺ is the Most Subtle, All-Aware
67|15|He is the One Who smoothed out the earth for you, so move about in its regions and eat from His provisions. And to Him is the resurrection ˹of all˺
67|16|Do you feel secure that the One Who is in heaven will not cause the earth to swallow you up as it quakes violently
67|17|Or do you feel secure that the One Who is in heaven will not unleash upon you a storm of stones. Only then would you know how ˹serious˺ My warning was
67|18|And certainly those before them denied ˹as well˺, then how severe was My response
67|19|Have they not seen the birds above them, spreading and folding their wings? None holds them up except the Most Compassionate. Indeed, He is All-Seeing of everything
67|20|Also, which ˹powerless˺ force will come to your help instead of the Most Compassionate? Indeed, the disbelievers are only ˹lost˺ in delusion
67|21|Or who is it that will provide for you if He withholds His provision? In fact, they persist in arrogance and aversion ˹to the truth˺
67|22|Who is ˹rightly˺ guided: the one who crawls facedown or the one who walks upright on the Straight Path
67|23|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “He is the One Who brought you into being and gave you hearing, sight, and intellect. ˹Yet˺ you hardly give any thanks.”
67|24|˹Also˺ say, “He is the One Who has dispersed you ˹all˺ over the earth, and to Him you will ˹all˺ be gathered.”
67|25|˹Still˺ they ask ˹the believers˺, “When will this threat come to pass, if what you say is true?”
67|26|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “That knowledge is with God alone, and I am only sent with a clear warning.”
67|27|Then when they see the torment drawing near, the faces of the disbelievers will become gloomy, and it will be said ˹to them˺, “This is what you claimed would never come.”
67|28|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Consider this: whether God causes me and those with me to die or shows us mercy, who will save the disbelievers from a painful punishment?”
67|29|Say, “He is the Most Compassionate—in Him ˹alone˺ we believe, and in Him ˹alone˺ we trust. You will soon know who is clearly astray.”
67|30|Say, “Consider this: if your water were to sink ˹into the earth˺, then who ˹else˺ could bring you flowing water?”
68|1|Nũn. By the pen and what everyone writes
68|2|By the grace of your Lord, you ˹O Prophet˺ are not insane
68|3|You will certainly have a never-ending reward
68|4|And you are truly ˹a man˺ of outstanding character
68|5|Soon you and the pagans will see
68|6|which of you is mad
68|7|Surely your Lord ˹alone˺ knows best who has strayed from His Way and who is ˹rightly˺ guided
68|8|So do not give in to the deniers
68|9|They wish you would compromise so they would yield ˹to you˺
68|10|And do not obey the despicable, vain oath-taker
68|11|slanderer, gossip-monger
68|12|withholder of good, transgressor, evildoer
68|13|brute, and—on top of all that—an illegitimate child
68|14|Now, ˹simply˺ because he has been blessed with ˹abundant˺ wealth and children
68|15|whenever Our revelations are recited to him, he says, “Ancient fables!”
68|16|We will soon mark his snout
68|17|Indeed, We have tested those ˹Meccans˺ as We tested the owners of the garden—when they swore they would surely harvest ˹all˺ its fruit in the early morning
68|18|leaving no thought for God’s Will
68|19|Then it was struck by a torment from your Lord while they slept
68|20|so it was reduced to ashes
68|21|Then by daybreak they called out to each other
68|22|˹saying,˺ “Go early to your harvest, if you want to pick ˹all˺ the fruit.”
68|23|So they went off, whispering to one another
68|24|“Do not let any poor person enter your garden today.”
68|25|And they proceeded early, totally fixated on their purpose
68|26|But when they saw it ˹devastated˺, they cried, “We must have lost ˹our˺ way
68|27|In fact, we have been deprived ˹of our livelihood˺.”
68|28|The most sensible of them said, “Did I not urge you to say, ‘God willing.’?”
68|29|They replied, “Glory be to our Lord! We have truly been wrongdoers.”
68|30|Then they turned on each other, throwing blame
68|31|They said, “Woe to us! We have certainly been transgressors
68|32|We trust our Lord will give us a better garden than this, ˹for˺ we are indeed turning to our Lord with hope.”
68|33|That is the ˹way of Our˺ punishment ˹in this world˺. But the punishment of the Hereafter is certainly far worse, if only they knew
68|34|Indeed, the righteous will have the Gardens of Bliss with their Lord
68|35|Should We then treat those who have submitted like the wicked
68|36|What is the matter with you? How do you judge
68|37|Or do you have a scripture, in which you read
68|38|that you will have whatever you choose
68|39|Or do you have oaths binding on Us until the Day of Judgment that you will have whatever you decide
68|40|Ask them ˹O Prophet˺ which of them can guarantee all that
68|41|Or do they have associate-gods ˹supporting this claim˺? Then let them bring forth their associate-gods, if what they say is true
68|42|˹Beware of˺ the Day the Shin ˹of God˺ will be bared, and the wicked will be asked to prostrate, but they will not be able to do so
68|43|with eyes downcast, totally covered with disgrace. For they were ˹always˺ called to prostrate ˹in the world˺ when they were fully capable ˹but they chose not to˺
68|44|So leave to Me ˹O Prophet˺ those who reject this message. We will gradually draw them to destruction in ways they cannot comprehend
68|45|I ˹only˺ delay their end for a while, but My planning is flawless
68|46|Or are you asking them for a reward ˹for the message˺ so that they are overburdened by debt
68|47|Or do they have access to ˹the Record in˺ the unseen, so they copy it ˹for all to see˺
68|48|So be patient with your Lord’s decree, and do not be like ˹Jonah,˺ the Man of the Whale, who cried out ˹to God˺, in total distress
68|49|Had he not been shown grace by his Lord, he would have certainly been cast onto the open ˹shore˺, still blameworthy
68|50|Then his Lord chose him, making him one of the righteous
68|51|The disbelievers would almost cut you down with their eyes when they hear ˹you recite˺ the Reminder, and say, “He is certainly a madman.”
68|52|But it is simply a reminder to the whole world
69|1|The Inevitable Hour
69|2|What is the Inevitable Hour
69|3|And what will make you realize what the Inevitable Hour is
69|4|˹Both˺ Thamûd and ’Ȃd denied the Striking Disaster
69|5|As for Thamûd, they were destroyed by an overwhelming blast
69|6|And as for ’Ȃd, they were destroyed by a furious, bitter wind
69|7|which God unleashed on them non-stop for seven nights and eight days, so that you would have seen its people lying dead like trunks of uprooted palm trees
69|8|Do you see any of them left alive
69|9|Also, Pharaoh and those before him, and ˹the people of˺ the overturned cities ˹of Lot˺ indulged in sin
69|10|each disobeying their Lord’s messenger, so He seized them with a crushing grip
69|11|Indeed, when the floodwater had overflowed, We carried you in the floating Ark ˹with Noah˺
69|12|so that We may make this a reminder to you, and that attentive ears may grasp it
69|13|At last, when the Trumpet will be blown with one blast
69|14|and the earth and mountains will be lifted up and crushed with one blow
69|15|on that Day the Inevitable Event will have come to pass
69|16|The sky will then be so torn that it will be frail
69|17|with the angels on its sides. On that Day eight ˹mighty angels˺ will bear the Throne of your Lord above them
69|18|You will then be presented ˹before Him for judgment˺, and none of your secrets will stay hidden
69|19|As for those given their records in their right hand, they will cry ˹happily˺, “Here ˹everyone˺! Read my record
69|20|I surely knew I would face my reckoning.”
69|21|They will be in a life of bliss
69|22|in an elevated Garden
69|23|whose fruit will hang within reach
69|24|˹They will be told,˺ “Eat and drink joyfully for what you did in the days gone by.”
69|25|And as for those given their record in their left hand, they will cry ˹bitterly˺, “I wish I had not been given my record
69|26|nor known anything of my reckoning
69|27|I wish death was the end
69|28|My wealth has not benefited me
69|29|My authority has been stripped from me.”
69|30|˹It will be said,˺ “Seize and shackle them
69|31|then burn them in Hell
69|32|then tie them up with chains seventy arms long
69|33|For they never had faith in God, the Greatest
69|34|nor encouraged the feeding of the poor
69|35|So this Day they will have no close friend here
69|36|nor any food except ˹oozing˺ pus
69|37|which none will eat except the evildoers.”
69|38|Now, I do swear by whatever you see
69|39|and whatever you cannot see
69|40|Indeed, this ˹Quran˺ is the recitation of a noble Messenger
69|41|It is not the prose of a poet ˹as you claim˺, ˹yet˺ you hardly have any faith
69|42|Nor is it the mumbling of a fortune-teller, ˹yet˺ you are hardly mindful
69|43|˹It is˺ a revelation from the Lord of all worlds
69|44|Had the Messenger made up something in Our Name
69|45|We would have certainly seized him by his right hand
69|46|then severed his aorta
69|47|and none of you could have shielded him ˹from Us˺
69|48|Indeed, this ˹Quran˺ is a reminder to those mindful ˹of God˺
69|49|And We certainly know that some of you will persist in denial
69|50|and it will surely be a source of regret for the disbelievers
69|51|And indeed, this ˹Quran˺ is the absolute truth
69|52|So glorify the Name of your Lord, the Greatest
70|1|A challenger has demanded a punishment bound to come
70|2|for the disbelievers—to be averted by none—
70|3|from God, Lord of pathways of ˹heavenly˺ ascent
70|4|˹through which˺ the angels and the ˹holy˺ spirit will ascend to Him on a Day fifty thousand years in length
70|5|So endure ˹this denial, O Prophet,˺ with beautiful patience
70|6|They truly see this ˹Day˺ as impossible
70|7|but We see it as inevitable
70|8|On that Day the sky will be like molten brass
70|9|and the mountains like ˹tufts of˺ wool
70|10|And no close friend will ask ˹about˺ their friends
70|11|˹although˺ they will be made to see each other. The wicked will wish to ransom themselves from the punishment of that Day by their children
70|12|their spouses, their siblings
70|13|their clan that sheltered them
70|14|and everyone on earth altogether, just to save themselves
70|15|But no! There will certainly be a raging Flame
70|16|ripping off scalps
70|17|It will summon whoever turned their backs ˹on God˺ and turned away ˹from the truth˺
70|18|and gathered and hoarded ˹wealth˺
70|19|Indeed, humankind was created impatient
70|20|distressed when touched with evil
70|21|and withholding when touched with good—
70|22|except those who pray
70|23|consistently performing their prayers
70|24|and who give the rightful share of their wealth
70|25|to the beggar and the poor
70|26|and who ˹firmly˺ believe in the Day of Judgment
70|27|and those who fear the punishment of their Lord—
70|28|˹knowing that˺ none should feel secure from their Lord’s punishment—
70|29|and those who guard their chastity
70|30|except with their wives or those ˹bondwomen˺ in their possession, for then they are free from blame
70|31|but whoever seeks beyond that are the transgressors
70|32|˹The faithful are˺ also those who are true to their trusts and covenants
70|33|and who are honest in their testimony
70|34|and who are ˹properly˺ observant of their prayers
70|35|These will be in Gardens, held in honour
70|36|So what is the matter with the disbelievers that they rush ˹head-long˺ towards you ˹O Prophet˺
70|37|from the right and the left, in groups ˹to mock you˺
70|38|Does every one of them expect to be admitted into a Garden of Bliss
70|39|But no! Indeed, they ˹already˺ know what We created them from
70|40|So, I do swear by the Lord of ˹all˺ the points of sunrise and sunset that We are truly capable
70|41|of replacing them with ˹others˺ better than them, and We cannot be prevented ˹from doing so˺
70|42|So let them indulge ˹in falsehood˺ and amuse ˹themselves˺ until they face their Day, which they have been threatened with—
70|43|the Day they will come forth from the graves swiftly, as if racing to an idol ˹for a blessing˺
70|44|with eyes downcast, utterly covered with disgrace. That is the Day they have ˹always˺ been warned of
71|1|Indeed, We sent Noah to his people ˹saying to him˺, “Warn your people before a painful punishment comes to them.”
71|2|Noah proclaimed, “O my people! I am truly sent to you with a clear warning
71|3|worship God ˹alone˺, fear Him, and obey me
71|4|He will forgive your sins, and delay your end until the appointed time. Indeed, when the time set by God comes, it cannot be delayed, if only you knew!”
71|5|He cried, “My Lord! I have surely called my people day and night
71|6|but my calls only made them run farther away
71|7|And whenever I invite them to be forgiven by You, they press their fingers into their ears, cover themselves with their clothes, persist ˹in denial˺, and act very arrogantly
71|8|Then I certainly called them openly
71|9|then I surely preached to them publicly and privately
71|10|saying, ‘Seek your Lord’s forgiveness, ˹for˺ He is truly Most Forgiving
71|11|He will shower you with abundant rain
71|12|supply you with wealth and children, and give you gardens as well as rivers
71|13|What is the matter with you that you are not in awe of the Majesty of God
71|14|when He truly created you in stages ˹of development˺
71|15|Do you not see how God created seven heavens, one above the other
71|16|placing the moon within them as a ˹reflected˺ light, and the sun as a ˹radiant˺ lamp
71|17|God ˹alone˺ caused you to grow from the earth like a plant
71|18|Then He will return you to it, and then simply bring you forth ˹again˺
71|19|And God ˹alone˺ spread out the earth for you
71|20|to walk along its spacious pathways.’”
71|21|˹Eventually,˺ Noah cried, “My Lord! They have certainly persisted in disobeying me, and followed ˹instead˺ those ˹elite˺ whose ˹abundant˺ wealth and children only increase them in loss
71|22|and who have devised a tremendous plot
71|23|urging ˹their followers˺, ‘Do not abandon your idols—especially Wadd, Suwâ’, Yaghûth, Ya’ûq, and Nasr.’
71|24|Those ˹elite˺ have already led many astray. So ˹O Lord˺, only allow the wrongdoers to stray farther away.”
71|25|So because of their sins, they were drowned, then admitted into the Fire. And they found none to help them against God
71|26|Noah had prayed, “My Lord! Do not leave a single disbeliever on earth
71|27|For if You spare ˹any of˺ them, they will certainly mislead Your servants, and give birth only to ˹wicked˺ sinners, staunch disbelievers
71|28|My Lord! Forgive me, my parents, and whoever enters my house in faith, and ˹all˺ believing men and women. And increase the wrongdoers only in destruction.”
72|1|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “It has been revealed to me that a group of jinn listened ˹to the Quran,˺ and said ˹to their fellow jinn˺: ‘Indeed, we have heard a wondrous recitation
72|2|It leads to Right Guidance so we believed in it, and we will never associate anyone with our Lord ˹in worship˺
72|3|˹Now, we believe that˺ our Lord—Exalted is His Majesty—has neither taken a mate nor offspring
72|4|and that the foolish of us used to utter ˹outrageous˺ falsehoods about God
72|5|We certainly thought that humans and jinn would never speak lies about God
72|6|And some men used to seek refuge with some jinn—so they increased each other in wickedness
72|7|And those ˹humans˺ thought, just like you ˹jinn˺, that God would not resurrect anyone ˹for judgment˺
72|8|˹Earlier˺ we tried to reach heaven ˹for news˺, only to find it filled with stern guards and shooting stars
72|9|We used to take up positions there for eavesdropping, but whoever dares eavesdrop now will find a flare lying in wait for them
72|10|Now, we have no clue whether evil is intended for those on earth, or their Lord intends for them what is right
72|11|Among us are those who are righteous and those who are less so. We have been of different factions
72|12|˹Now,˺ we truly know that we cannot frustrate God on earth, nor can we escape from Him ˹into heaven˺
72|13|When we heard the guidance ˹of the Quran˺, we ˹readily˺ believed in it. For whoever believes in their Lord will have no fear of being denied ˹a reward˺ or wronged
72|14|And among us are those who have submitted ˹to God˺ and those who are deviant. So ˹as for˺ those who submitted, it is they who have attained Right Guidance
72|15|And as for the deviant, they will be fuel for Hell.’”
72|16|Had the deniers followed the Right Way, We would have certainly granted them abundant rain to drink—
72|17|as a test for them. And whoever turns away from the remembrance of their Lord will be admitted by Him into an overwhelming punishment
72|18|The places of worship are ˹only˺ for God, so do not invoke anyone besides Him
72|19|Yet when the servant of God stood up calling upon Him ˹alone˺, the pagans almost swarmed over him
72|20|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “I call only upon my Lord, associating none with Him ˹in worship˺.”
72|21|Say, “It is not in my power to harm or benefit you.”
72|22|Say, “No one can protect me from God ˹if I were to disobey Him˺, nor can I find any refuge other than Him
72|23|˹My duty is˺ only to convey ˹the truth˺ from God and ˹deliver˺ His messages.” And whoever disobeys God and His Messenger will certainly be in the Fire of Hell, to stay there for ever and ever
72|24|Only when they see what they have been threatened with will they know who is weaker in helpers and inferior in manpower
72|25|Say, “I do not know if what you are promised is near or my Lord has set a distant time for it
72|26|˹He is the˺ Knower of the unseen, disclosing none of it to anyone
72|27|except messengers of His choice. Then He appoints angel-guards before and behind them
72|28|to ensure that the messengers fully deliver the messages of their Lord—though He ˹already˺ knows all about them, and keeps account of everything.”
73|1|O you wrapped ˹in your clothes˺
73|2|Stand all night ˹in prayer˺ except a little—
73|3|˹pray˺ half the night, or a little less
73|4|or a little more—and recite the Quran ˹properly˺ in a measured way
73|5|˹For˺ We will soon send upon you a weighty revelation
73|6|Indeed, worship in the night is more impactful and suitable for recitation
73|7|For during the day you are over-occupied ˹with worldly duties˺
73|8|˹Always˺ remember the Name of your Lord, and devote yourself to Him wholeheartedly
73|9|˹He is the˺ Lord of the east and the west. There is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him, so take Him ˹alone˺ as a Trustee of Affairs
73|10|Be patient ˹O Prophet˺ with what they say, and depart from them courteously
73|11|And leave to Me the deniers—the people of luxury—and bear with them for a little while
73|12|˹For˺ We certainly have shackles, a ˹raging˺ Fire
73|13|choking food, and a painful punishment ˹in store for them˺
73|14|on the Day the earth and mountains will shake ˹violently˺, and mountains will be ˹reduced to˺ dunes of shifting sand
73|15|Indeed, We have sent to you a messenger as a witness over you, just as We sent a messenger to Pharaoh
73|16|But Pharaoh disobeyed the messenger, so We seized him with a stern grip
73|17|If you ˹pagans˺ persist in disbelief, then how will you guard yourselves against ˹the horrors of˺ a Day which will turn children’s hair grey
73|18|It will ˹even˺ cause the sky to split apart. His promise ˹of judgment˺ must be fulfilled
73|19|Surely this is a reminder. So let whoever wills take the ˹Right˺ Way to their Lord
73|20|Surely your Lord knows that you ˹O Prophet˺ stand ˹in prayer˺ for nearly two-thirds of the night, or ˹sometimes˺ half of it, or a third, as do some of those with you. God ˹alone˺ keeps a ˹precise˺ measure of the day and night. He knows that you ˹believers˺ are unable to endure this, and has turned to you in mercy. So recite ˹in prayer˺ whatever you can from the Quran. He knows that some of you will be sick, some will be travelling throughout the land seeking God’s bounty, and some fighting in the cause of God. So recite whatever you can from it. And ˹continue to˺ perform ˹regular˺ prayers, pay alms-tax, and lend to God a good loan. Whatever good you send forth for yourselves, you will find it with God far better and more rewarding. And seek God’s forgiveness. Surely God is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
74|1|O you covered up ˹in your clothes˺
74|2|Arise and warn ˹all˺
74|3|Revere your Lord ˹alone˺
74|4|Purify your garments
74|5|˹Continue to˺ shun idols
74|6|Do not do a favour expecting more ˹in return˺
74|7|And persevere for ˹the sake of˺ your Lord
74|8|˹For˺ when the Trumpet will be sounded
74|9|that will ˹truly˺ be a difficult Day—
74|10|far from easy for the disbelievers
74|11|And leave to me ˹O Prophet˺ the one I created all by Myself
74|12|and granted him abundant wealth
74|13|and children always by his side
74|14|and made life very easy for him
74|15|Yet he is hungry for more
74|16|But no! ˹For˺ he has been truly stubborn with Our revelations
74|17|I will make his fate unbearable
74|18|for he contemplated and determined ˹a degrading label for the Quran˺
74|19|May he be condemned! How evil was what he determined
74|20|May he be condemned even more! How evil was what he determined
74|21|Then he re-contemplated ˹in frustration˺
74|22|then frowned and scowled
74|23|then turned his back ˹on the truth˺ and acted arrogantly
74|24|saying, “This ˹Quran˺ is nothing but magic from the ancients
74|25|This is no more than the word of a man.”
74|26|Soon I will burn him in Hell
74|27|And what will make you realize what Hell is
74|28|It does not let anyone live or die
74|29|scorching the skin
74|30|It is overseen by nineteen ˹keepers˺
74|31|We have appointed only ˹stern˺ angels as wardens of the Fire. And We have made their number only as a test for the disbelievers, so that the People of the Book will be certain, and the believers will increase in faith, and neither the People of the Book nor the believers will have any doubts, and so that those ˹hypocrites˺ with sickness in their hearts and the disbelievers will argue, “What does God mean by such a number?” In this way God leaves whoever He wills to stray and guides whoever He wills. And none knows the forces of your Lord except He. And this ˹description of Hell˺ is only a reminder to humanity
74|32|But no! By the moon
74|33|and the night as it retreats
74|34|and the day as it breaks
74|35|Surely Hell is one of the mightiest catastrophes—
74|36|a warning to humankind
74|37|to whichever of you chooses to take the lead or lag behind
74|38|Every soul will be detained for what it has done
74|39|except the people of the right
74|40|who will be in Gardens, asking one another
74|41|about the wicked ˹who will then be asked˺
74|42|“What has landed you in Hell?”
74|43|They will reply, “We were not of those who prayed
74|44|nor did we feed the poor
74|45|We used to indulge ˹in falsehood˺ along with others
74|46|and deny the Day of Judgment
74|47|until the inevitable came to us.”
74|48|So the pleas of intercessors will be of no benefit to them
74|49|Now, what is the matter with them that they are turning away from the reminder
74|50|as if they were spooked zebras
74|51|fleeing from a lion
74|52|In fact, each one of them wishes to be given a ˹personal˺ letter ˹from God˺ for all ˹to read˺
74|53|But no! In fact, they do not fear the Hereafter
74|54|Enough! Surely this ˹Quran˺ is a reminder
74|55|So let whoever wills be mindful of it
74|56|But they cannot do so unless God wills. He ˹alone˺ is worthy to be feared and entitled to forgive
75|1|I do swear by the Day of Judgment
75|2|And I do swear by the self-reproaching soul
75|3|Do people think We cannot reassemble their bones
75|4|Yes ˹indeed˺! We are ˹most˺ capable of restoring ˹even˺ their very fingertips
75|5|Still people want to deny what is yet to come
75|6|asking ˹mockingly˺, “When is this Day of Judgment?”
75|7|But when the sight is stunned
75|8|and the moon is dimmed
75|9|and the sun and the moon are brought together
75|10|on that Day one will cry, “Where is the escape?”
75|11|But no! There will be no refuge
75|12|On that Day all will end up before your Lord
75|13|All will then be informed of what they have sent forth and left behind
75|14|In fact, people will testify against their own souls
75|15|despite the excuses they come up with
75|16|Do not rush your tongue trying to memorize ˹a revelation of˺ the Quran
75|17|It is certainly upon Us to ˹make you˺ memorize and recite it
75|18|So once We have recited a revelation ˹through Gabriel˺, follow its recitation ˹closely˺
75|19|Then it is surely upon Us to make it clear ˹to you˺
75|20|But no! In fact, you love this fleeting world
75|21|and neglect the Hereafter
75|22|On that Day ˹some˺ faces will be bright
75|23|looking at their Lord
75|24|And ˹other˺ faces will be gloomy
75|25|anticipating something devastating to befall them
75|26|But no! ˹Beware of the day˺ when the soul reaches the collar bone ˹as it leaves˺
75|27|and it will be said, “Is there any healer ˹who can save this life˺?”
75|28|And the dying person realizes it is ˹their˺ time to depart
75|29|and ˹then˺ their feet are tied together ˹in a shroud˺
75|30|On that day they will be driven to your Lord ˹alone˺
75|31|This denier neither believed nor prayed
75|32|but persisted in denial and turned away
75|33|then went to their own people, walking boastfully
75|34|Woe to you, and more woe
75|35|Again, woe to you, and even more woe
75|36|Do people think they will be left without purpose
75|37|Were they not ˹once˺ a sperm-drop emitted
75|38|Then they became a clinging clot ˹of blood˺, then He developed and perfected their form
75|39|producing from it both sexes, male and female
75|40|Is such ˹a Creator˺ unable to bring the dead back to life
76|1|Is there not a period of time when each human is nothing yet worth mentioning
76|2|˹For˺ indeed, We ˹alone˺ created humans from a drop of mixed fluids, ˹in order˺ to test them, so We made them hear and see
76|3|We already showed them the Way, whether they ˹choose to˺ be grateful or ungrateful
76|4|Indeed, We have prepared for the disbelievers chains, shackles, and a blazing Fire
76|5|Indeed, the virtuous will have a drink ˹of pure wine˺—flavoured with camphor—
76|6|˹from˺ a spring where God’s servants will drink, flowing at their will
76|7|They ˹are those who˺ fulfil ˹their˺ vows and fear a Day of sweeping horror
76|8|and give food—despite their desire for it—to the poor, the orphan, and the captive
76|9|˹saying to themselves,˺ “We feed you only for the sake of God, seeking neither reward nor thanks from you
76|10|We fear from our Lord a horribly distressful Day.”
76|11|So God will deliver them from the horror of that Day, and grant them radiance and joy
76|12|and reward them for their perseverance with a Garden ˹in Paradise˺ and ˹garments of˺ silk
76|13|There they will be reclining on ˹canopied˺ couches, never seeing scorching heat or bitter cold
76|14|The Garden’s shade will be right above them, and its fruit will be made very easy to reach
76|15|They will be waited on with silver vessels and cups of crystal—
76|16|crystalline silver, filled precisely as desired
76|17|And they will be given a drink ˹of pure wine˺ flavoured with ginger
76|18|from a spring there, called Salsabîl
76|19|They will be waited on by eternal youths. If you saw them, you would think they were scattered pearls
76|20|And if you looked around, you would see ˹indescribable˺ bliss and a vast kingdom
76|21|The virtuous will be ˹dressed˺ in garments of fine green silk and rich brocade, and adorned with bracelets of silver, and their Lord will give them a purifying drink
76|22|˹And they will be told,˺ “All this is surely a reward for you. Your striving has been appreciated.”
76|23|Indeed, it is We Who have revealed the Quran to you ˹O Prophet˺ in stages
76|24|So be patient with your Lord’s decree, and do not yield to any evildoer or ˹staunch˺ disbeliever from among them
76|25|˹Always˺ remember the Name of your Lord morning and evening
76|26|and prostrate before Him during part of the night, and glorify Him long at night
76|27|Surely those ˹pagans˺ love this fleeting world, ˹totally˺ neglecting a weighty Day ahead of them
76|28|It is We Who created them and perfected their ˹physical˺ form. But if We will, We can easily replace them with others
76|29|Surely this is a reminder. So let whoever wills take the ˹Right˺ Way to their Lord
76|30|But you cannot will ˹to do so˺ unless God wills. Indeed, God is All-Knowing, All-Wise
76|31|He admits whoever He wills into His mercy. As for the wrongdoers, He has prepared for them a painful punishment
77|1|By those ˹winds˺ sent forth successively
77|2|and those blowing violently
77|3|and those scattering ˹rainclouds˺ widely
77|4|And ˹by˺ those ˹angels˺ fully distinguishing ˹truth from falsehood˺
77|5|and those delivering revelation
77|6|ending excuses and giving warnings
77|7|Surely, what you are promised will come to pass
77|8|So when the stars are put out
77|9|and the sky is torn apart
77|10|and the mountains are blown away
77|11|and the messengers’ time ˹to testify˺ comes up—
77|12|for which Day has all this been set
77|13|For the Day of ˹Final˺ Decision
77|14|And what will make you realize what the Day of Decision is
77|15|Woe on that Day to the deniers
77|16|Did We not destroy earlier disbelievers
77|17|And We will make the later disbelievers follow them
77|18|This is how We deal with the wicked
77|19|Woe on that Day to the deniers
77|20|Did We not create you from a humble fluid
77|21|placing it in a secure place
77|22|until an appointed time
77|23|We ˹perfectly˺ ordained ˹its development˺. How excellent are We in doing so
77|24|Woe on that Day to the deniers
77|25|Have We not made the earth a lodging
77|26|for the living and the dead
77|27|and placed upon it towering, firm mountains, and given you fresh water to drink
77|28|Woe on that Day to the deniers
77|29|˹The disbelievers will be told,˺ “Proceed into that ˹Fire˺ which you used to deny
77|30|Proceed into the shade ˹of smoke˺ which rises in three columns
77|31|providing neither coolness nor shelter from the flames
77|32|Indeed, it hurls sparks ˹as big˺ as huge castles
77|33|and ˹as dark˺ as black camels.”
77|34|Woe on that Day to the deniers
77|35|On that Day they will not ˹be in a position to˺ speak
77|36|nor will they be permitted to offer excuses
77|37|Woe on that Day to the deniers
77|38|˹They will be told by God,˺ “This is the Day of ˹Final˺ Decision: We have gathered you along with earlier disbelievers ˹for punishment˺
77|39|So if you have a scheme ˹to save yourselves˺, then use it against Me.”
77|40|Woe on that Day to the deniers
77|41|Indeed, the righteous will be amid ˹cool˺ shade and springs
77|42|and any fruit they desire
77|43|˹They will be told,˺ “Eat and drink happily for what you used to do.”
77|44|Surely this is how We reward the good-doers
77|45|˹But˺ woe on that Day to the deniers
77|46|“Eat and enjoy yourselves for a little while, ˹for˺ you are truly wicked.”
77|47|Woe on that Day to the deniers
77|48|When it is said to them, “Bow down ˹before God,” they do not bow
77|49|Woe on that Day to the deniers
77|50|So what message after this ˹Quran˺ would they believe in
78|1|What are they asking one another about
78|2|About the momentous news
78|3|over which they disagree
78|4|But no! They will come to know
78|5|Again, no! They will come to know
78|6|Have We not smoothed out the earth ˹like a bed˺
78|7|and ˹made˺ the mountains as ˹its˺ pegs
78|8|and created you in pairs
78|9|and made your sleep for rest
78|10|and made the night as a cover
78|11|and made the day for livelihood
78|12|and built above you seven mighty ˹heavens˺
78|13|and placed ˹in them˺ a shining lamp
78|14|and sent down from rainclouds pouring water
78|15|producing by it grain and ˹various˺ plants
78|16|and dense orchards
78|17|Indeed, the Day of ˹Final˺ Decision is an appointed time—
78|18|˹it is˺ the Day the Trumpet will be blown, and you will ˹all˺ come forth in crowds
78|19|The sky will be ˹split˺ open, becoming ˹many˺ gates
78|20|and the mountains will be blown away, becoming ˹like˺ a mirage
78|21|Indeed, Hell is lying in ambush
78|22|as a home for the transgressors
78|23|where they will remain for ˹endless˺ ages
78|24|There they will not taste any coolness or drink
78|25|except boiling water and ˹oozing˺ pus—
78|26|a fitting reward
78|27|For they never expected any reckoning
78|28|and totally rejected Our signs
78|29|And We have everything recorded precisely
78|30|˹So the deniers will be told,˺ “Taste ˹the punishment˺, for all you will get from Us is more torment.”
78|31|Indeed, the righteous will have salvation—
78|32|Gardens, vineyards
78|33|and full-bosomed maidens of equal age
78|34|and full cups ˹of pure wine˺
78|35|never to hear any idle talk or lying therein—
78|36|a ˹fitting˺ reward as a generous gift from your Lord
78|37|the Lord of the heavens and the earth and everything in between, the Most Compassionate. No one will dare speak to Him
78|38|on the Day the ˹holy˺ spirit and the angels will stand in ranks. None will talk, except those granted permission by the Most Compassionate and whose words are true
78|39|That Day is the ˹ultimate˺ truth. So let whoever wills take the path leading back to their Lord
78|40|Indeed, We have warned you of an imminent punishment—the Day every person will see ˹the consequences of˺ what their hands have done, and the disbelievers will cry, “I wish I were dust.”
79|1|By those ˹angels˺ stripping out ˹evil souls˺ harshly
79|2|and those pulling out ˹good souls˺ gently
79|3|and those gliding ˹through heavens˺ swiftly
79|4|and those taking the lead vigorously
79|5|and those conducting affairs ˹obediently˺
79|6|˹Consider˺ the Day ˹when˺ the quaking Blast will come to pass
79|7|followed by a second Blast
79|8|˹The deniers’˺ hearts on that Day will be trembling ˹in horror˺
79|9|with their eyes downcast
79|10|˹But now˺ they ask ˹mockingly˺, “Will we really be restored to our former state
79|11|even after we have been reduced to decayed bones?”
79|12|Adding, “Then such a return would be a ˹total˺ loss ˹for us˺!”
79|13|But indeed, it will take only one ˹mighty˺ Blast
79|14|and at once they will be above ground
79|15|Has the story of Moses reached you ˹O Prophet˺
79|16|His Lord called him in the sacred valley of Ṭuwa
79|17|˹commanding,˺ “Go to Pharaoh, for he has truly transgressed ˹all bounds˺
79|18|And say, ‘Would you ˹be willing to˺ purify yourself
79|19|and let me guide you to your Lord so that you will be in awe ˹of Him˺?’”
79|20|Then Moses showed him the great sign
79|21|but he denied and disobeyed ˹God˺
79|22|then turned his back, striving ˹against the truth˺
79|23|Then he summoned ˹his people˺ and called out
79|24|saying, “I am your lord, the most high!”
79|25|So God overtook him, making him an example in this life and the next
79|26|Surely in this is a lesson for whoever stands in awe of ˹God˺
79|27|Which is harder to create: you or the sky? He built it
79|28|raising it high and forming it flawlessly
79|29|He dimmed its night, and brought forth its daylight
79|30|As for the earth, He spread it out as well
79|31|bringing forth its water and pastures
79|32|and setting the mountains firmly ˹upon it˺—
79|33|all as ˹a means of˺ sustenance for you and your animals
79|34|But, when the Supreme Disaster comes to pass—
79|35|the Day every person will remember all ˹their˺ striving
79|36|and the Hellfire will be displayed for all to see—
79|37|then as for those who transgressed
79|38|and preferred the ˹fleeting˺ life of this world
79|39|the Hellfire will certainly be ˹their˺ home
79|40|And as for those who were in awe of standing before their Lord and restrained themselves from ˹evil˺ desires
79|41|Paradise will certainly be ˹their˺ home
79|42|They ask you ˹O Prophet˺ regarding the Hour, “When will it be?”
79|43|But it is not for you to tell its time
79|44|That knowledge rests with your Lord ˹alone˺
79|45|Your duty is only to warn whoever is in awe of it
79|46|On the Day they see it, it will be as if they had stayed ˹in the world˺ no more than one evening or its morning
80|1|He frowned and turned ˹his attention˺ away
80|2|˹simply˺ because the blind man came to him ˹interrupting˺
80|3|You never know ˹O Prophet˺, perhaps he may be purified
80|4|or he may be mindful, benefitting from the reminder
80|5|As for the one who was indifferent
80|6|you gave him your ˹undivided˺ attention
80|7|even though you are not to blame if he would not be purified
80|8|But as for the one who came to you, eager ˹to learn˺
80|9|being in awe ˹of God˺
80|10|you were inattentive to him
80|11|But no! This ˹revelation˺ is truly a reminder
80|12|So let whoever wills be mindful of it
80|13|It is ˹written˺ on pages held in honour—
80|14|highly esteemed, purified—
80|15|by the hands of angel-scribes
80|16|honourable and virtuous
80|17|Condemned are ˹disbelieving˺ humans! How ungrateful they are ˹to God˺
80|18|From what substance did He create them
80|19|He created them from a sperm-drop, and ordained their development
80|20|Then He makes the way easy for them
80|21|then causes them to die and be buried
80|22|Then when He wills, He will resurrect them
80|23|But no! They have failed to comply with what He ordered
80|24|Let people then consider their food
80|25|how We pour down rain in abundance
80|26|and meticulously split the earth open ˹for sprouts˺
80|27|causing grain to grow in it
80|28|as well as grapes and greens
80|29|and olives and palm trees
80|30|and dense orchards
80|31|and fruit and fodder—
80|32|all as ˹a means of˺ sustenance for you and your animals
80|33|Then, when the Deafening Blast comes to pass—
80|34|on that Day every person will flee from their own siblings
80|35|and ˹even˺ their mother and father
80|36|and ˹even˺ their spouse and children
80|37|For then everyone will have enough concern of their own
80|38|On that Day ˹some˺ faces will be bright
80|39|laughing and rejoicing
80|40|while ˹other˺ faces will be dusty
80|41|cast in gloom—
80|42|those are the disbelievers, the ˹wicked˺ sinners
81|1|When the sun is put out
81|2|and when the stars fall down
81|3|and when the mountains are blown away
81|4|and when pregnant camels are left untended
81|5|and when wild beasts are gathered together
81|6|and when the seas are set on fire
81|7|and when the souls ˹and their bodies˺ are paired ˹once more˺
81|8|and when baby girls, buried alive, are asked
81|9|for what crime they were put to death
81|10|and when the records ˹of deeds˺ are laid open
81|11|and when the sky is stripped away
81|12|and when the Hellfire is fiercely flared up
81|13|and when Paradise is brought near—
81|14|˹on that Day˺ each soul will know what ˹deeds˺ it has brought along
81|15|I do swear by the receding stars
81|16|which travel and hide
81|17|and the night as it falls
81|18|and the day as it breaks
81|19|Indeed, this ˹Quran˺ is the Word of ˹God delivered by Gabriel,˺ a noble messenger-angel
81|20|full of power, held in honour by the Lord of the Throne
81|21|obeyed there ˹in heaven˺, and trustworthy
81|22|And your fellow man is not insane
81|23|And he did see that ˹angel˺ on the clear horizon
81|24|and he does not withhold ˹what is revealed to him of˺ the unseen
81|25|And this ˹Quran˺ is not the word of an outcast devil
81|26|So what ˹other˺ path would you take
81|27|Surely this ˹Quran˺ is only a reminder to the whole world—
81|28|to whoever of you wills to take the Straight Way
81|29|But you cannot will ˹to do so˺, except by the Will of God, the Lord of all worlds
82|1|When the sky splits open
82|2|and when the stars fall away
82|3|and when the seas burst forth
82|4|and when the graves spill out
82|5|˹then˺ each soul will know what it has sent forth or left behind
82|6|O humanity! What has emboldened you against your Lord, the Most Generous
82|7|Who created you, fashioned you, and perfected your design
82|8|moulding you in whatever form He willed
82|9|But no! In fact, you deny the ˹final˺ Judgment
82|10|while you are certainly observed by vigilant
82|11|honourable angels, recording ˹everything˺
82|12|They know whatever you do
82|13|Indeed, the virtuous will be in bliss
82|14|and the wicked will be in Hell
82|15|burning in it on Judgment Day
82|16|and they will have no escape from it
82|17|What will make you realize what Judgment Day is
82|18|Again, what will make you realize what Judgment Day is
82|19|˹It is˺ the Day no soul will be of ˹any˺ benefit to another whatsoever, for all authority on that Day belongs to God ˹entirely˺
83|1|Woe to the defrauders
83|2|Those who take full measure ˹when they buy˺ from people
83|3|but give less when they measure or weigh for buyers
83|4|Do such people not think that they will be resurrected
83|5|for a tremendous Day—
83|6|the Day ˹all˺ people will stand before the Lord of all worlds
83|7|But no! The wicked are certainly bound for Sijjîn ˹in the depths of Hell˺—
83|8|and what will make you realize what Sijjîn is?—
83|9|a fate ˹already˺ sealed
83|10|Woe on that Day to the deniers—
83|11|those who deny Judgment Day
83|12|None would deny it except every evildoing transgressor
83|13|Whenever Our revelations are recited to them, they say, “Ancient fables!”
83|14|But no! In fact, their hearts have been stained by all ˹the evil˺ they used to commit
83|15|Undoubtedly, they will be sealed off from their Lord on that Day
83|16|Moreover, they will surely burn in Hell
83|17|and then be told, “This is what you used to deny.”
83|18|But no! The virtuous are certainly bound for ’Illiyûn ˹in elevated Gardens˺—
83|19|and what will make you realize what ’Illiyûn is?—
83|20|a fate ˹already˺ sealed
83|21|witnessed by those nearest ˹to God˺
83|22|Surely the virtuous will be in bliss
83|23|˹seated˺ on ˹canopied˺ couches, gazing around
83|24|You will recognize on their faces the glow of delight
83|25|They will be given a drink of sealed, pure wine
83|26|whose last sip will smell like musk. So let whoever aspires to this strive ˹diligently˺
83|27|And this drink’s flavour will come from Tasnîm—
83|28|a spring from which those nearest ˹to God˺ will drink
83|29|Indeed, the wicked used to laugh at the believers
83|30|wink to one another whenever they passed by
83|31|and muse ˹over these exploits˺ upon returning to their own people
83|32|And when they saw the faithful, they would say, “These ˹people˺ are truly astray,”
83|33|even though they were not sent as keepers over the believers
83|34|But on that Day the believers will be laughing at the disbelievers
83|35|as they sit on ˹canopied˺ couches, looking on
83|36|˹The believers will be asked,˺ “Have the disbelievers ˹not˺ been paid back for what they used to do?”
84|1|When the sky bursts open
84|2|obeying its Lord as it must
84|3|and when the earth is flattened out
84|4|and ejects ˹all˺ its contents and becomes empty
84|5|obeying its Lord as it must, ˹surely you will all be judged˺
84|6|O humanity! Indeed, you are labouring restlessly towards your Lord, and will ˹eventually˺ meet the consequences
84|7|As for those who are given their record in their right hand
84|8|they will have an easy reckoning
84|9|and will return to their people joyfully
84|10|And as for those who are given their record ˹in their left hand˺ from behind their backs
84|11|they will cry for ˹instant˺ destruction
84|12|and will burn in the blazing Fire
84|13|For they used to be prideful among their people
84|14|thinking they would never return ˹to God˺
84|15|Yes ˹they would˺! Surely their Lord has always been All-Seeing of them
84|16|So, I do swear by the twilight
84|17|And by the night and whatever it envelops
84|18|And by the moon when it waxes full
84|19|You will certainly pass from one state to another
84|20|So what is the matter with them that they do not believe
84|21|and when the Quran is recited to them, they do not bow down ˹in submission˺
84|22|In fact, the disbelievers persist in denial
84|23|But God knows best whatever they hide
84|24|So give them good news of a painful punishment
84|25|But those who believe and do good will have a never-ending reward
85|1|By the sky full of constellations
85|2|and the promised Day ˹of Judgment˺
85|3|and the witness and what is witnessed
85|4|Condemned are the makers of the ditch—
85|5|the fire ˹pit˺, filled with fuel—
85|6|when they sat around it
85|7|watching what they had ˹ordered to be˺ done to the believers
85|8|who they resented for no reason other than belief in God—the Almighty, the Praiseworthy—
85|9|˹the One˺ to Whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and earth. And God is a Witness over all things
85|10|Those who persecute the believing men and women and then do not repent will certainly suffer the punishment of Hell and the torment of burning
85|11|Surely those who believe and do good will have Gardens under which rivers flow. That is the greatest triumph
85|12|Indeed, the ˹crushing˺ grip of your Lord is severe
85|13|˹For˺ He is certainly the One Who originates and resurrects ˹all˺
85|14|And He is the All-Forgiving, All-Loving—
85|15|Lord of the Throne, the All-Glorious
85|16|Doer of whatever He wills
85|17|Has the story of the ˹destroyed˺ forces reached you ˹O Prophet˺—
85|18|˹the forces of˺ Pharaoh and Thamûd
85|19|Yet the disbelievers ˹still˺ persist in denial
85|20|But God encompasses them from all sides
85|21|In fact, this is a glorious Quran
85|22|˹recorded˺ in a Preserved Tablet
86|1|By the heaven and the nightly star
86|2|And what will make you realize what the nightly star is
86|3|˹It is˺ the star of piercing brightness
86|4|There is no soul without a vigilant angel ˹recording everything˺
86|5|Let people then consider what they were created from
86|6|˹They were˺ created from a spurting fluid
86|7|stemming from between the backbone and the ribcage
86|8|Surely He is fully capable of bringing them back ˹to life˺
86|9|on the Day all secrets will be disclosed
86|10|Then one will have neither power nor ˹any˺ helper
86|11|By the sky with its recurring cycles
86|12|and the earth with its sprouting plants
86|13|Surely this ˹Quran˺ is a decisive word
86|14|and is not to be taken lightly
86|15|They are certainly devising ˹evil˺ plans
86|16|but I too am planning
86|17|So bear with the disbelievers ˹O Prophet˺. Let them be for ˹just˺ a little while
87|1|Glorify the Name of your Lord, the Most High
87|2|Who created and ˹perfectly˺ fashioned ˹all˺
87|3|and Who ordained precisely and inspired accordingly
87|4|and Who brings forth ˹green˺ pasture
87|5|then reduces it to withered chaff
87|6|We will have you recite ˹the Quran, O Prophet,˺ so you will not forget ˹any of it˺
87|7|unless God wills otherwise. He surely knows what is open and what is hidden
87|8|We will facilitate for you the Way of Ease
87|9|So ˹always˺ remind ˹with the Quran˺—˹even˺ if the reminder is beneficial ˹only to some˺
87|10|Those in awe ˹of God˺ will be mindful ˹of it˺
87|11|But it will be shunned by the most wretched
87|12|who will burn in the greatest Fire
87|13|where they will not ˹be able to˺ live or die
87|14|Successful indeed are those who purify themselves
87|15|remember the Name of their Lord, and pray
87|16|But you ˹deniers only˺ prefer the life of this world
87|17|even though the Hereafter is far better and more lasting
87|18|This is certainly ˹mentioned˺ in the earlier Scriptures—
87|19|the Scriptures of Abraham and Moses
88|1|Has the news of the Overwhelming Event reached you ˹O Prophet˺
88|2|On that Day ˹some˺ faces will be downcast
88|3|˹totally˺ overburdened, exhausted
88|4|burning in a scorching Fire
88|5|left to drink from a scalding spring
88|6|They will have no food except a foul, thorny shrub
88|7|neither nourishing nor satisfying hunger
88|8|On that Day ˹other˺ faces will be glowing with bliss
88|9|˹fully˺ pleased with their striving
88|10|in an elevated Garden
88|11|where no idle talk will be heard
88|12|In it will be a running spring
88|13|along with thrones raised high
88|14|and cups set at hand
88|15|and ˹fine˺ cushions lined up
88|16|and ˹splendid˺ carpets spread out
88|17|Do they not ever reflect on camels—how they were ˹masterfully˺ created
88|18|and the sky—how it was raised ˹high˺
88|19|and the mountains—how they were firmly set up
88|20|and the earth—how it was levelled out
88|21|So, ˹continue to˺ remind ˹all, O Prophet˺, for your duty is only to remind
88|22|You are not ˹there˺ to compel them ˹to believe˺
88|23|But whoever turns away, persisting in disbelief
88|24|then God will inflict upon them the major punishment
88|25|Surely to Us is their return
88|26|then surely with Us is their reckoning
89|1|By the dawn
89|2|and the ten nights
89|3|and the even and the odd
89|4|and the night when it passes
89|5|Is all this ˹not˺ a sufficient oath for those who have sense
89|6|Did you not see how your Lord dealt with ’Ȃd—
89|7|˹the people˺ of Iram—with ˹their˺ great stature
89|8|unmatched in any other land
89|9|and Thamûd who carved ˹their homes into˺ the rocks in the ˹Stone˺ Valley
89|10|and the Pharaoh of mighty structures
89|11|They all transgressed throughout the land
89|12|spreading much corruption there
89|13|So your Lord unleashed on them a scourge of punishment
89|14|˹For˺ your Lord is truly vigilant
89|15|Now, whenever a human being is tested by their Lord through ˹His˺ generosity and blessings, they boast, “My Lord has ˹deservedly˺ honoured me!”
89|16|But when He tests them by limiting their provision, they protest, “My Lord has ˹undeservedly˺ humiliated me!”
89|17|Absolutely not! In fact, you are not ˹even˺ gracious to the orphan
89|18|nor do you urge one another to feed the poor
89|19|And you devour ˹others’˺ inheritance greedily
89|20|and love wealth fervently
89|21|Enough! When the earth is entirely crushed over and over
89|22|and your Lord comes ˹to judge˺ with angels, rank upon rank
89|23|and Hell is brought forth on that Day—this is when every ˹disbelieving˺ person will remember ˹their own sins˺. But what is the use of remembering then
89|24|They will cry, “I wish I had sent forth ˹something good˺ for my ˹true˺ life.”
89|25|On that Day He will punish ˹them˺ severely, like no other
89|26|and bind ˹them˺ tightly, like no other
89|27|˹God will say to the righteous,˺ “O tranquil soul
89|28|Return to your Lord, well pleased ˹with Him˺ and well pleasing ˹to Him˺
89|29|So join My servants
89|30|and enter My Paradise.”
90|1|I do swear by this city ˹of Mecca˺—
90|2|even though you ˹O Prophet˺ are subject to abuse in this city—
90|3|and by every parent and ˹their˺ child
90|4|Indeed, We have created humankind in ˹constant˺ struggle
90|5|Do they think that no one has power over them
90|6|boasting, “I have wasted enormous wealth!”
90|7|Do they think that no one sees them
90|8|Have We not given them two eyes
90|9|a tongue, and two lips
90|10|and shown them the two ways ˹of right and wrong˺
90|11|If only they had attempted the challenging path ˹of goodness instead˺
90|12|And what will make you realize what ˹attempting˺ the challenging path is
90|13|It is to free a slave
90|14|or to give food in times of famine
90|15|to an orphaned relative
90|16|or to a poor person in distress
90|17|and—above all—to be one of those who have faith and urge each other to perseverance and urge each other to compassion
90|18|These are the people of the right
90|19|As for those who deny Our signs, they are the people of the left
90|20|The Fire will be sealed over them
91|1|By the sun and its brightness
91|2|and the moon as it follows it
91|3|and the day as it unveils it
91|4|and the night as it conceals it
91|5|And by heaven and ˹the One˺ Who built it
91|6|and the earth and ˹the One˺ Who spread it
91|7|And by the soul and ˹the One˺ Who fashioned it
91|8|then with ˹the knowledge of˺ right and wrong inspired it
91|9|Successful indeed is the one who purifies their soul
91|10|and doomed is the one who corrupts it
91|11|Thamûd rejected ˹the truth˺ out of arrogance
91|12|when the most wicked of them was roused ˹to kill the she-camel˺
91|13|But the messenger of God warned them, “˹Do not disturb˺ God’s camel and her ˹turn to˺ drink!”
91|14|Still they defied him and slaughtered her. So their Lord crushed them for their crime, levelling all to the ground
91|15|He has no fear of consequences
92|1|By the night when it covers
92|2|and the day when it shines
92|3|And by ˹the One˺ Who created male and female
92|4|Surely the ends you strive for are diverse
92|5|As for the one who is charitable, mindful ˹of God˺
92|6|and ˹firmly˺ believes in the finest reward
92|7|We will facilitate for them the Way of Ease
92|8|And as for the one who is stingy, indifferent ˹to God˺
92|9|and ˹staunchly˺ denies the finest reward
92|10|We will facilitate for them the path of hardship
92|11|And their wealth will be of no benefit to them when they tumble ˹into Hell˺
92|12|It is certainly upon Us ˹alone˺ to show ˹the way to˺ guidance
92|13|And surely to Us ˹alone˺ belong this life and the next
92|14|And so I have warned you of a raging Fire
92|15|in which none will burn except the most wretched—
92|16|who deny and turn away
92|17|But the righteous will be spared from it—
92|18|who donate ˹some of˺ their wealth only to purify themselves
92|19|not in return for someone’s favours
92|20|but seeking the pleasure of their Lord, the Most High
92|21|They will certainly be pleased
93|1|By the morning sunlight
93|2|and the night when it falls still
93|3|Your Lord ˹O Prophet˺ has not abandoned you, nor has He become hateful ˹of you˺
93|4|And the next life is certainly far better for you than this one
93|5|And ˹surely˺ your Lord will give so much to you that you will be pleased
93|6|Did He not find you as an orphan then sheltered you
93|7|Did He not find you unguided then guided you
93|8|And did He not find you needy then satisfied your needs
93|9|So do not oppress the orphan
93|10|nor repulse the beggar
93|11|And proclaim the blessings of your Lord
94|1|Have We not uplifted your heart for you ˹O Prophet˺
94|2|relieved you of the burden
94|3|which weighed so heavily on your back
94|4|and elevated your renown for you
94|5|So, surely with hardship comes ease
94|6|Surely with ˹that˺ hardship comes ˹more˺ ease
94|7|So once you have fulfilled ˹your duty˺, strive ˹in devotion˺
94|8|turning to your Lord ˹alone˺ with hope
95|1|By the fig and the olive ˹of Jerusalem˺
95|2|and Mount Sinai
95|3|and this secure city ˹of Mecca˺
95|4|Indeed, We created humans in the best form
95|5|But We will reduce them to the lowest of the low ˹in Hell˺
95|6|except those who believe and do good—they will have a never-ending reward
95|7|Now, what makes you deny the ˹final˺ Judgment
95|8|Is God not the most just of all judges
96|1|Read, ˹O Prophet,˺ in the Name of your Lord Who created—
96|2|created humans from a clinging clot
96|3|Read! And your Lord is the Most Generous
96|4|Who taught by the pen—
96|5|taught humanity what they knew not
96|6|Most certainly, one exceeds all bounds
96|7|once they think they are self-sufficient
96|8|˹But˺ surely to your Lord is the return ˹of all˺
96|9|Have you seen the man who prevents
96|10|a servant ˹of Ours˺ from praying
96|11|What if this ˹servant˺ is ˹rightly˺ guided
96|12|or encourages righteousness
96|13|What if that ˹man˺ persists in denial and turns away
96|14|Does he not know that God sees ˹all˺
96|15|But no! If he does not desist, We will certainly drag him by the forelock—
96|16|a lying, sinful forelock
96|17|So let him call his associates
96|18|We will call the wardens of Hell
96|19|Again, no! Never obey him ˹O Prophet˺! Rather, ˹continue to˺ prostrate and draw near ˹to God˺
97|1|Indeed, ˹it is˺ We ˹Who˺ sent this ˹Quran˺ down on the Night of Glory
97|2|And what will make you realize what the Night of Glory is
97|3|The Night of Glory is better than a thousand months
97|4|That night the angels and the ˹holy˺ spirit descend, by the permission of their Lord, for every ˹decreed˺ matter
97|5|It is all peace until the break of dawn
98|1|The disbelievers from the People of the Book and the polytheists were not going to desist ˹from disbelief˺ until the clear proof came to them
98|2|a messenger from God, reciting scrolls of ˹utmost˺ purity
98|3|containing upright commandments
98|4|It was not until this clear proof came to the People of the Book that they became divided ˹about his prophethood˺—
98|5|even though they were only commanded to worship God ˹alone˺ with sincere devotion to Him in all uprightness, establish prayer, and pay alms-tax. That is the upright Way
98|6|Indeed, those who disbelieve from the People of the Book and the polytheists will be in the Fire of Hell, to stay there forever. They are the worst of ˹all˺ beings
98|7|Indeed, those who believe and do good—they are the best of ˹all˺ beings
98|8|Their reward with their Lord will be Gardens of Eternity, under which rivers flow, to stay there for ever and ever. God is pleased with them and they are pleased with Him. This is ˹only˺ for those in awe of their Lord
99|1|When the earth is shaken ˹in˺ its ultimate quaking
99|2|and when the earth throws out ˹all˺ its contents
99|3|and humanity cries, “What is wrong with it?”—
99|4|on that Day the earth will recount everything
99|5|having been inspired by your Lord ˹to do so˺
99|6|On that Day people will proceed in separate groups to be shown ˹the consequences of˺ their deeds
99|7|So whoever does an atom’s weight of good will see it
99|8|And whoever does an atom’s weight of evil will see it
100|1|’ By the galloping, panting horses
100|2|striking sparks of fire ˹with their hoofs˺
100|3|launching raids at dawn
100|4|stirring up ˹clouds of˺ dust
100|5|and penetrating into the heart of enemy lines
100|6|Surely humankind is ungrateful to their Lord—
100|7|and they certainly attest to this—
100|8|and they are truly extreme in their love of ˹worldly˺ gains
100|9|Do they not know that when the contents of the graves will be spilled out
100|10|and the secrets of the hearts will be laid bare—
100|11|surely their Lord is All-Aware of them on that Day
101|1|The Striking Disaster
101|2|What is the Striking Disaster
101|3|And what will make you realize what the Striking Disaster is
101|4|˹It is˺ the Day people will be like scattered moths
101|5|and the mountains will be like carded wool
101|6|So as for those whose scale is heavy ˹with good deeds˺
101|7|they will be in a life of bliss
101|8|And as for those whose scale is light
101|9|their home will be the abyss
101|10|And what will make you realize what that is
101|11|˹It is˺ a scorching Fire
102|1|Competition for more ˹gains˺ diverts you ˹from God˺
102|2|until you end up in ˹your˺ graves
102|3|But no! You will soon come to know
102|4|Again, no! You will soon come to know
102|5|Indeed, if you were to know ˹your fate˺ with certainty, ˹you would have acted differently˺
102|6|˹But˺ you will surely see the Hellfire
102|7|Again, you will surely see it with the eye of certainty
102|8|Then, on that Day, you will definitely be questioned about ˹your worldly˺ pleasures
103|1|By the ˹passage of˺ time
103|2|Surely humanity is in ˹grave˺ loss
103|3|except those who have faith, do good, and urge each other to the truth, and urge each other to perseverance
104|1|Woe to every backbiter, slanderer
104|2|who amasses wealth ˹greedily˺ and counts it ˹repeatedly˺
104|3|thinking that their wealth will make them immortal
104|4|Not at all! Such a person will certainly be tossed into the Crusher
104|5|And what will make you realize what the Crusher is
104|6|˹It is˺ God’s kindled Fire
104|7|which rages over the hearts
104|8|It will be sealed over them
104|9|˹tightly secured˺ with long braces
105|1|Have you not seen ˹O Prophet˺ how your Lord dealt with the Army of the Elephant
105|2|Did He not frustrate their scheme
105|3|For He sent against them flocks of birds
105|4|that pelted them with stones of baked clay
105|5|leaving them like chewed up straw
106|1|˹At least˺ for ˹the favour of˺ making Quraysh habitually secure—
106|2|secure in their trading caravan ˹to Yemen˺ in the winter and ˹Syria˺ in the summer—
106|3|let them worship the Lord of this ˹Sacred˺ House
106|4|Who has fed them against hunger and made them secure against fear
107|1|Have you seen the one who denies the ˹final˺ Judgment
107|2|That is the one who repulses the orphan
107|3|and does not encourage the feeding of the poor
107|4|So woe to those ˹hypocrites˺ who pray
107|5|yet are unmindful of their prayers
107|6|those who ˹only˺ show off
107|7|and refuse to give ˹even the simplest˺ aid
108|1|Indeed, We have granted you ˹O Prophet˺ abundant goodness
108|2|So pray and sacrifice to your Lord ˹alone˺
108|3|Only the one who hates you is truly cut off ˹from any goodness˺
109|1|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “O you disbelievers
109|2|I do not worship what you worship
109|3|nor do you worship what I worship
109|4|I will never worship what you worship
109|5|nor will you ever worship what I worship
109|6|You have your way, and I have my Way.”
110|1|When God’s ˹ultimate˺ help comes and the victory ˹over Mecca is achieved˺
110|2|and you ˹O Prophet˺ see the people embracing God’s Way in crowds
110|3|then glorify the praises of your Lord and seek His forgiveness, for certainly He is ever Accepting of Repentance
111|1|May the hands of Abu Lahab perish, and he ˹himself˺ perish
111|2|Neither his wealth nor ˹worldly˺ gains will benefit him
111|3|He will burn in a flaming Fire
111|4|and ˹so will˺ his wife, the carrier of ˹thorny˺ kindling
111|5|around her neck will be a rope of palm-fibre
112|1|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “He is God—One ˹and Indivisible˺
112|2|God—the Sustainer ˹needed by all˺
112|3|He has never had offspring, nor was He born
112|4|And there is none comparable to Him.”
113|1|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “I seek refuge in the Lord of the daybreak
113|2|from the evil of whatever He has created
113|3|and from the evil of the night when it grows dark
113|4|and from the evil of those ˹witches casting spells by˺ blowing onto knots
113|5|and from the evil of an envier when they envy.”
114|1|Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “I seek refuge in the Lord of humankind
114|2|the Master of humankind
114|3|the God of humankind
114|4|from the evil of the lurking whisperer—
114|5|who whispers into the hearts of humankind—
114|6|from among jinn and humankind.”
{
    "name": "eng-mustafakhattabg",
    "author": "Mustafa Khattab God Edition",
    "language": "English",
    "direction": "ltr",
    "source": "",
    "comments": "",
    "link": "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/fawazahmed0/quran-api@1/editions/eng-mustafakhattabg.json",
    "linkmin": "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/fawazahmed0/quran-api@1/editions/eng-mustafakhattabg.min.json"
}