1|1|In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful
1|2|All praise belongs to God, Lord of the Universe
1|3|the Beneficent, the Merciful
1|4|and Master of the Day of Judgment
1|5|(Lord), You alone We do worship and from You alone we do seek assistance
1|6|(Lord), guide us to the right path
1|7|the path of those to whom You have granted blessings, those who are neither subject to Your anger nor have gone astray
2|1|Alif. Lam. Mim
2|2|There is no doubt that this book is a guide for the pious
2|3|the pious who believe in the unseen, attend to prayer, give in charity part of what We have granted them
2|4|who have faith in what has been revealed to you and others before you and have strong faith in the life hereafter
2|5|It is the pious who follow the guidance of their Lord and gain lasting happiness
2|6|Those who deny your message will not believe whether you warn them or not
2|7|God has sealed their hearts and hearing and their vision is veiled; a great punishment awaits them
2|8|Some people say, "We believe in God and the Day of Judgment," but they are not true believers
2|9|They deceive God and the believers. However, they have deceived no one but themselves, a fact of which they are not aware
2|10|A sickness exists in their hearts to which God adds more sickness. Besides this, they will suffer a painful punishment as a result of the lie which they speak
2|11|When they are told not to commit corruption in the land, they reply, "We are only reformers
2|12|They, certainly, are corrupt but do not realize it
2|13|When they are told to believe as everyone else does, they say, "Should we believe as fools do?" In fact, they themselves are fools, but they do not know it
2|14|To the believers they declare belief and, in secret to their own devils, they say, "We were only mocking
2|15|God mocks them and gives them time to continue blindly in their transgressions
2|16|They have traded guidance for error, but their bargain has had no profit and they have missed the true guidance
2|17|(Their case) is like that of one who kindles a fire and when it grows bright God takes away its light leaving him in darkness (wherein) he cannot see (anything)
2|18|They are deaf, blind, and dumb and cannot regain their senses
2|19|Or it is like that of a rain storm with darkness, thunder, and lightning approaching. They cover their ears for fear of thunder and death. God encompasses those who deny His words
2|20|The lightning almost takes away their vision. When the lightning brightens their surroundings, they walk and when it is dark, they stand still. Had God wanted, He could have taken away their hearing and their vision. God has power over all things
2|21|People, worship your Lord who created you and those who lived before you, so that you may become pious
2|22|Worship God who has rendered the earth as a floor for you and the sky as a dome for you and has sent water down from the sky to produce fruits for your sustenance. Do not knowingly set up anything as an equal to God
2|23|Should you have any doubt about what We have revealed to Our servant, present one chapter comparable to it and call all your supporters, besides God, if your claim is true
2|24|If you do not produce such a chapter and you never will then guard yourselves against the fire whose fuel will be people and stones and is prepared for those who hide the Truth
2|25|(Muhammad), tell the righteously striving believers of the happy news, that for them there are gardens wherein streams flow. Whenever they get any fruit from the gardens as food, they will say, "This is just what we had before (we came here). These fruits are produced very much like them (those we had before)." They will have purified spouses and it is they who will live forever
2|26|God does not hesitate to set forth parables of anything even a gnat. The believers know that it is the truth from their Lord, but those who deny the truth say, "What does God mean by such parables?" In fact, by such parables God misleads and guides many. However, He only misleads the evil doers
2|27|who break their established covenant with Him and the relations He has commanded to be kept and who spread evil in the land. These are the ones who lose a great deal
2|28|How dare you deny the existence of God Who gave you life when you initially had no life. He will cause you to die and bring you to life again. Then you will return to His Presence
2|29|It is He who created everything on earth for you. Then, directing His order towards the realm above, He turned it into seven heavens. He has knowledge of all things
2|30|When your Lord said to the angels, "I am appointing someone as my deputy on earth," they said (almost protesting), "Are you going to appoint one who will commit corruption and bloodshed therein, even though we (are the ones who) commemorate Your Name and glorify You?" The Lord said, "I know that which you do not know
2|31|He taught Adam all the names. Then He introduced (some intelligent beings) to the angels, asking them to tell Him the names of these beings, if the angels were true to their claim (that they more deserved to be His deputies on earth)
2|32|The angels replied, "You are glorious indeed! We do not know more than what You have taught us. You alone are All-knowing and All-wise
2|33|The Lord said to Adam, "Tell the names of the beings to the angels." When Adam said their names, the Lord said, "Did I not tell you (angels) that I know the secrets of the heavens and the earth and all that you reveal or hide
2|34|When We told the angels to prostrate before Adam, they all obeyed except Iblis (Satan) who abstained out of pride and so he became one of those who deny the truth
2|35|We told Adam to stay with his spouse (Eve) in the garden and enjoy the foods therein, but not to go near a certain tree lest he become one of the transgressors
2|36|Satan made Adam and his spouse err and caused them to abandon the state in which they had been living. Then We said, "Descend, you are each other's enemies! The earth will be a dwelling place for you and it will provide you with sustenance for an appointed time
2|37|Adam was inspired by some words (of prayer) through which he received forgiveness from his Lord, for He is All-forgiving and All-merciful
2|38|We ordered them all to get out of the garden and told them that when Our guidance came to them, those who would follow it would have neither fear nor grief
2|39|But those who would deny the Truth and reject Our revelations would be the companions of the Fire in which they would live forever
2|40|Children of Israel, recall My favors which you enjoyed. Fulfill your covenant with Me and I shall fulfill Mine. Revere only Me
2|41|Believe in My revelations (Quran) that confirms what I revealed to you (about Prophet Muhammad in your Scripture). Do not be the first ones to deny it nor sell My revelations for a small price, but have fear of Me
2|42|Do not mix truth with falsehood and do not deliberately hide the truth
2|43|Be steadfast in prayer, pay the religious tax (zakat) and bow down in worship with those who do the same
2|44|Would you order people to do good deeds and forget to do them yourselves even though you read the Book? Why do you not think
2|45|Help yourselves (in your affairs) with patience and prayer. It is a difficult task indeed, but not for the humble ones
2|46|who are certain of their meeting with their Lord and their return to Him
2|47|Children of Israel, recall My favors to you and the preference that I gave to you over all nations
2|48|Have fear of the day when every soul will be responsible for itself. No intercession or ransom will be accepted and no one will receive help
2|49|(Children of Israel, recall My favor) of saving you from the Pharaoh's people who afflicted you with the worst kind of cruelty, slaying your sons and sparing your women. Your suffering was indeed a great trial from your Lord
2|50|We parted the sea to save you and drowned Pharaoh's people before your very eyes
2|51|Then We called Moses for an appointment of forty nights. You began to worship the calf in his absence, doing wrong to yourselves
2|52|Afterwards, We forgave you so that you would perhaps appreciate Our favors
2|53|We gave Moses the Book and the criteria (of discerning right from wrong) so that perhaps you would be rightly guided
2|54|Moses said to his people, "My people, you have done wrong to yourselves by worshipping the calf. Seek pardon from your Lord and slay yourselves." He told them that it would be best for them in the sight of their Lord, Who would forgive them, for He is All-forgiving and All-merciful
2|55|When you argued with Moses, saying that you were not going to believe him unless you could see God with your own eyes, the swift wind struck you and you could do nothing but watch
2|56|Then We brought you back to life in the hope that you might appreciate Our favors
2|57|We provided you with shade from the clouds and sent down manna and quails as the best pure sustenance for you to eat. They (children of Israel) did not wrong Us but wronged themselves
2|58|(Children of Israel, recall My favors) when We told you, "Enter this city, enjoy eating whatever you want therein, prostrate yourselves and ask forgiveness when passing through the gate, and We shall forgive your sins, and add to the rewards of the righteous ones
2|59|The unjust ones among you changed what they were told to say. Then, We afflicted them with a torment from the heavens for their evil deeds
2|60|When Moses prayed for rain, We told him to strike the rock with his staff. Thereupon twelve fountains gushed out of the rock and each tribe knew their drinking place. The Lord told them, "Eat and drink from God's bounties and do not abuse the earth with corruption
2|61|When you demanded Moses to provide you with a variety of food, saying, "We no longer have patience with only one kind of food, ask your Lord to grow green herbs, cucumbers, corn, lentils, and onions for us," Moses replied, "Would you change what is good for what is worse? Go to any town and you will get what you want." Despised and afflicted with destitution, they brought the wrath of God back upon themselves, for they denied the evidence (of the existence of God) and murdered His Prophets without reason; they were disobedient transgressors
2|62|However, those who have become believers (the Muslims), and the Jews, the Christians and the Sabaeans who believe in God and the Day of Judgment and strive righteously will receive their reward from the Lord and will have nothing to fear nor will they be grieved
2|63|Children of Israel, recall when We made a covenant with you, raised Mount Tur (Sinai) above you and told you to receive earnestly what We had given to you and bear it in mind so that you would protect yourselves against evil
2|64|Again you turned away. Had God's Grace and His Mercy not existed in your favor, you would certainly have been lost
2|65|You certainly knew about those among you who were transgressors on the Sabbath. We commanded them, "Become detested apes
2|66|in order to set up an example for their contemporaries and coming generations and to make it a reminder for the pious
2|67|When Moses said to his people, "God commands you to sacrifice a cow," they asked, "Are you mocking us?" "God forbid, how would I be so ignorant," said Moses
2|68|They demanded, "Ask your Lord to describe the kind of cow He wants us to slaughter." Moses explained, "It must be neither too old nor too young, thus do whatever you are commanded to do." Moses then told them to do as they were ordered
2|69|They further demanded Moses to ask the Lord what color the cow has to be. Moses answered, "The Lord says that the cow must be yellow, a beautiful yellow
2|70|They said, "We are confused about the cow, for to us all cows look alike. Ask your Lord to tell us exactly what the cow looks like, so that God willing, we shall have the right description
2|71|(Moses) said, "The Lord says that it must not have even tilled the soil nor irrigated the fields and it must be free of blemishes and flaws." They said, "Now you have given us the right description." After almost failing to find it, they slaughtered the cow
2|72|When you murdered someone, each one of you tried to accuse others of being guilty. However, God made public what you were hiding
2|73|We said, "Strike the person slain with some part of the cow." That is how God brings the dead to life and shows you His miracles so that you might have understanding
2|74|Thereafter, your hearts turned as hard as rocks or even harder for some rocks give way to the streams to flow. Water comes out of some rocks when they are torn apart and others tumble down in awe before God. God does not ignore what you do
2|75|Do you, the believers in truth, desire the unbelievers to believe you? There was a group among them who would hear the word of God and understand it. Then they would purposely misinterpret it
2|76|On meeting the believers, they would declare belief but to each other they would say, "How would you (against your own interests) tell them (believers) about what God has revealed to you (in the Bible of the truthfulness of the Prophet Muhammad)? They will present it as evidence to prove you wrong before your Lord. Do you not realize it
2|77|Do they not know that God knows whatever they conceal or reveal
2|78|Some of them are illiterate and have no knowledge of the Book except for what they know from legends and fantasy. They are only relying on conjecture
2|79|Woe to those who write the Book themselves and say, "This is from God," so that they may sell it for a small price! Woe unto them for what they have done and for what they have gained
2|80|They have said, "Hell fire will never harm us except for just a few days." (Muhammad), ask them, "Have you made such agreements with God Who never breaks any of His agreements or you just ascribe to Him that which you do not know
2|81|There is no doubt that evil doers who are engulfed in sins are the companions of hell fire wherein they will live forever
2|82|As for the righteously striving believers, they will be among the people of Paradise wherein they will live forever
2|83|We made a covenant with the children of Israel that they should not worship anyone except Me, that they should serve their parents, relatives, orphans, and the destitute, that they should speak righteous words to people, and that they should be steadfast in their prayers and pay the religious tax. But soon after you made this covenant, all but a few of you broke it heedlessly
2|84|We made a covenant with you that you should not shed each other's blood or expel each other from your homeland. You accepted and bore witness to this covenant
2|85|yet you murdered each other and forced a number of your people out of their homeland, helping each other to commit sin and to be hostile to one another. When you had expelled people from their homeland and later they had been made captives (of other people), you then paid their ransom (thinking that it was a righteous deed). God forbade you to expel these people in the first place. Do you believe in one part of the Book and not in the other? Those who behave in this way shall reap disgrace in this world and severe punishment on the Day of Resurrection. God is not unaware of things that you do
2|86|They have traded the life hereafter in exchange for their worldly life. Their punishment will not be eased nor will they receive help
2|87|We gave the Book to Moses and made the Messengers follow in his path. To Jesus, the son of Mary, We gave the miracles and supported him by the Holy Spirit. Why do you arrogantly belie some Messengers and murder others whenever they have brought you messages that you dislike
2|88|They have said that their hearts cannot understand (what you, Muhammad, say). God has condemned them for their denial of the Truth. There are a very few of them who have faith
2|89|When a Book came to them from God which confirms what is with them (the fact of truthfulness of the Prophet Muhammad in their Scripture), and, despite the fact that they had been praying for victory over the disbelievers (by the help of the truthful Prophet), they refuse to accept this book, even though they know it (to be the Truth). May God condemn those who hide the Truth
2|90|Evil is that for which they have sold their souls: They have refused to accept God's revelations in rebellion against the servant of God whom He has, by His Grace, chosen to grant His message. They have brought upon themselves God's wrath in addition to the wrath that they had incurred upon themselves for their previous sins. The disbelievers will suffer a humiliating torment
2|91|When they are told to believe n God's revelations, they reply, "We believe only in what God has revealed to us," but they disbelieve His other true revelations, even though these revelations confirms their own (original) Scripture. (Muhammad) ask them, "Why did you murder God's Prophets if you were true believers
2|92|(Moses) brought you certain miracles. Not very long after, you began worshipping the calf which was nothing but senseless cruelty to yourselves
2|93|(Children of Israel) when We made a covenant with you, raised Mount Tur (Sinai) above you, and told you to receive devotedly what We had revealed to you and to listen to it, you said that you had listened but you disobeyed. They denied the truth and became totally devoted and full of love for the calf. (Muhammad) tell these people, "If, in fact, you are true believers, then what your faith commands you to do is evil
2|94|(Muhammad), tell them, "If your claim is true that the home with God in the everlasting life hereafter is for you alone, you should have a longing for death
2|95|But they can never have a longing for death because of what they have done. God knows the unjust well
2|96|However, you will find them the greediest of all men, even more than the pagans, for life. They would each gladly live for a thousand years, but such a long life would not save them from the torment. God sees what they do
2|97|(Muhammad), tell the people, whoever is an enemy to Gabriel who has delivered the Book to your heart as a guide and as joyful news to the believers
2|98|and as a confirmation of (original) Scripture and whoever is the enemy of God, His angels, His Messenger, Gabriel and Michael, should know that God is the enemy of those who hide the Truth
2|99|(Muhammad) We have given you enlightening authority. Only the wicked sinners deny it
2|100|Why is it that every time they (the Jews) make a covenant, some of them abandon it. Most of them do not even believe
2|101|When a Messenger of God came to them confirming the (original) revelation that they already had received, a group of those who had the Scripture with them, threw the Book of God behind their backs as if they did not know anything about it
2|102|They followed the incantations that the devils used against the kingdom of Solomon. Solomon did not hide the truth but the devils did. They taught magic to the people and whatever was revealed to the two angels, Harut and Marut, in Babylon. The two angels did not teach anything to anyone without saying, "Our case is a temptation for the people, so do not hide the truth." People learned something from the two angels that could cause discord between a man and his wife. However, they could harm no one except by the permission of God. In fact, the (people) learned things that would harm them and render them no benefit. They knew very well that one who engaged in witchcraft would have no reward in the life hereafter. Would that they had known that they had sold their souls for that which is vile
2|103|Would that they had known that if they had embraced the faith and avoided evil, they would have received better rewards from God
2|104|Believers, do not address the Prophet as ra'ina (whereby the Jews, in their own accent, meant: Would that you would never hear, but call him unzurna) (meaning: Please speak to us slowly so that we understand), and then listen. The unbelievers will face a painful torment
2|105|(Muhammad) the disbelievers among the People of the Book and the pagans do not like to see anything good revealed to you from your Lord. God reserves His mercy for whomever He chooses. The generosity of God is great
2|106|For whatever sign We change or eliminate or cause to recede into oblivion, We bring forth a better sign, one that is identical. Do you not know that God has power over all things
2|107|Do you not know that the kingdom of the heavens and the earth belongs to God and that no one is your guardian or helper besides Him
2|108|Do you want to address the Prophet in the same manner in which Moses was addressed? Anyone who exchanges belief for disbelief has certainly gone down the wrong path
2|109|Once you have accepted the faith, many of the People of the Book would love, out of envy, to turn you back to disbelief, even after the Truth has become evident to them. Have forgiveness and bear with them until God issues His order. God has power over all things
2|110|Be steadfast in your prayer and pay the religious tax. You will receive a good reward from God for all your good works. God is Well-aware of what you do
2|111|They have said that no one can ever go to Paradise except the Jews or Christians, but this is only what they hope. Ask them to prove that their claim is true
2|112|However, one who accepts Islam in submission to God and does good, will have his reward with God. Such people will have nothing to fear nor to grieve about
2|113|The Jews accuse the Christians of having no basis for their religion and the Christians accuse the Jews of having no basis for their religion, even though both sides read the Scripture. The ignorant ones say the same thing. God will issue His decree about their dispute on the Day of Judgment
2|114|Who is more unjust than those who strive to destroy the mosques and prevent others from commemorating the Name of God therein who could not enter the mosques except with fear. They, (the unjust ones), will be disgraced in this life and will receive great torment in the life hereafter
2|115|The East and the West belong to God. Wherever you turn, you are always in the presence of God. God is Munificent and Omniscient
2|116|They, (the People of the Book), have said that God has taken for Himself a son. He is too glorious to have a son. To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. All pray in obedience to Him
2|117|God is the Originator of the heavens and the earth. Whenever He decides to do anything, He just commands it to exist and it comes into existence
2|118|The ignorant have asked, "Why does He not speak to us and why has no evidence come to show us (that He exists)?" People before them had also asked such questions. They all think in the same way. We have already made the evidence very clear for those who have certainty
2|119|We have sent you (Muhammad) for a genuine purpose to proclaim glad news and warnings. You will not be blamed for the dwellers of blazing hell
2|120|The Jews and Christians will never be pleased with you unless you follow their faith. (Muhammad) tell them that the guidance of God is the only true guidance. If you follow their wishes after all the knowledge that has come to you, you will no longer have God as your guardian and helper
2|121|Those (of the People of the Book) who have received Our Book (Quran), and read it thoroughly, believe in it. Those who disbelieve the Book are certainly losers
2|122|Children of Israel, recall My favor to you and the preference that I gave to you over all the other nations
2|123|Have fear of the day when every soul will be responsible for itself, no ransom will be accepted for it, no intercession will be of any benefit to it and no one will receive any help
2|124|When his Lord tested Abraham's faith, (by His words) and he satisfied the test, He said, "I am appointing you as the leader of mankind." Abraham asked, "Will this leadership also continue through my descendants?" The Lord replied, "The unjust do not have the right to exercise My authority
2|125|We made the house (in Mecca) as a place of refuge and sanctuary for men. Adopt the place where Abraham stood as a place for prayer. We advised Abraham and Ishmael to keep My house clean for the pilgrims, the worshippers and for those who bow down and prostrate themselves in worship
2|126|When Abraham prayed to the Lord saying, "Lord, make this town a place of security and provide those in the town who believe in God and the Day of Judgement, with plenty," God replied, "I shall allow those who hide the truth to enjoy themselves for a while. Then I shall drive them into the torment of hell fire, a terrible destination
2|127|While Abraham and Ishmael were raising the foundation of the house, they prayed, "Lord, accept our labor. You are All-hearing and All-knowing
2|128|Lord, make us good Muslims (one who submits himself to God) and from our descendants make a good Muslim nation. Teach us the rules of worship and accept our repentance; You are All-forgiving and All-merciful
2|129|Lord, send to them (our descendants) a Messenger of their own who will recite to them Your revelations, teach them the Book, give them wisdom, and purify them. You alone are the Majestic and the Most Wise
2|130|No one turns away from Abraham's Tradition except one who makes a fool of himself. To Abraham We have granted distinction in this world and in the life hereafter he will be among the righteous ones
2|131|When God commanded Abraham to submit, he replied, "I have submitted myself to the Will of the Lord of the universe
2|132|Abraham left this legacy to his sons and, in turn, so did Jacob saying, "God has chosen this religion for you. You must not leave this world unless you are a Muslim (submitted to the will of the Lord of the Universe)
2|133|Were you (believers) there when death approached Jacob? When he asked his sons, "Whom will you worship after my death?" They replied, "We will worship your Lord, the Lord of your fathers, Abraham, Ishmael, and Isaac. He is the only Lord, and to Him we have submitted ourselves
2|134|That nation (children of Abraham) is gone. They have reaped what they sowed, and the same applies to you. You are not responsible for their deeds
2|135|The Jews and the Christians have asked the Muslims to accept their faith to have the right guidance. (Muhammad) tell them, "We would rather follow the upright religion of Abraham who was not a pagan
2|136|(Muslims), say, "We believe in God and what He has revealed to us and to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, and their descendants, and what was revealed to Moses, Jesus, and the Prophets from their Lord. We make no distinction among them and to God we have submitted ourselves
2|137|If they have faith in all that you believe, they will have the right guidance, but if they turn away, it would be for no reason other than their own malice. God is a Sufficient defender for you against them; He is All-hearing and All-knowing
2|138|Say, "Belief in God and following the guidance of Islam are God's means of purification for us. Islam is the baptism of God. No one is a better baptizer than He and we Muslims worship Him
2|139|(Muhammad), ask the People of the Book, "Why should you argue with us about God, Who is our Lord as well as yours, when we are sincere in our belief in God
2|140|Everyone will be responsible for his own deeds. Do you (People of the Book) claim that Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, and their descendants were Jews or Christians?" Ask them, "Who possesses greater knowledge, you or God? Who is more unjust than one who refuses to testify to the truth that God has given to him?" God is not unaware of what you do
2|141|That nation is gone, they have reaped what they sowed and the same applies to you. You are not responsible for their deeds
2|142|Fools will soon say, "What has made them (Muslims) change the direction to which they had been facing during their prayers (the qibla)?" (Muhammad), tell them, "Both the East and West belong to God and He guides (whomever He wants), to the right direction
2|143|We have made you (true Muslims) a moderate nation so that you could be an example for all people and the Prophet an example for you. The direction which you had been facing during your prayers (the qibla) was only made in order that We would know who would follow the Messenger and who would turn away. It was a hard test but not for those to whom God has given guidance. God did not want to make your previous prayers worthless; God is Compassionate and All-merciful
2|144|We certainly saw you (Muhammad) often turn your face to the sky, so We shall instruct you to face a qibla that you will like. (Muhammad) during prayer, turn your face towards the Sacred Mosque (in Makkah). Muslims, also, wherever you are, during your prayers, turn your faces towards the Sacred Mosque. The People of the Book certainly know that this command (to change the qibla) is truly from their Lord. God is not unaware of what they do
2|145|Even if you were to bring all kinds of authoritative proof to the People of the Book, they still would not accept your qibla, nor would you accept theirs, nor would they accept each others. Were you to follow their desires after all the knowledge that has come to you, you would certainly have been one of the unjust
2|146|Those to whom We have given the Book (Bible), know you (Muhammad) just as a well as they know their sons. It is certain that some of them deliberately hide the truth
2|147|Never doubt that the essence of truth comes from your Lord
2|148|Every one pursues his goal. Compete with each other in performing good deeds. Wherever you are, God will bring you all together. God has power over all things
2|149|(Muhammad), wherever you go, turn your face towards the Sacred Mosque (in Mecca). This is the truth from your Lord who is not unaware of what you do
2|150|(Muhammad) wherever you go, turn your face to the Sacred Mosque and Muslims, wherever you are, turn your faces in the same direction so that no group of people, except the unjust among them, would have any reason against you and so that I may establish My commandments for your people to have proper guidance. (The unjust may criticize you) but do not fear them, fear only Me
2|151|As We have sent a Messenger from your own people to show you evidence about Me, to purify you from sins, to teach you the Book, give you wisdom and instruct you in that which you did not know
2|152|therefore, remember Me and I shall remember you. Thank Me and do not hide the truth about Me
2|153|Believers, help yourselves (in your affairs) through patience and prayer; God is with those who have patience
2|154|Do not consider those who are slain for the cause of God to be dead. They are alive but you are unaware of them
2|155|We shall test you through fear, hunger, loss of life, property, and crops. (Muhammad), give glad news to the people who have patience
2|156|and in difficulty say, "We are the servants of God and to Him we shall all return
2|157|It is they who will receive blessings and mercy from God and who follow the right guidance
2|158|Safa and Marwah (names of two places in Mecca) are reminders of God. It is no sin for one who visits the Sacred House (in Mecca) to walk seven times between (Safa and Marwah.) Whoever willingly does a good deed in obedience to God, will find God All-knowing and Fully Appreciative
2|159|Those who hide the authoritative proofs and the guidance that We have revealed, after it has been made clear for the People of the Book, will be condemned by God and those who have the right to condemn
2|160|However, I shall accept the repentance of those of them who repent for their sins, reform their manners, and preach the truth; I am All-forgiving and All-merciful
2|161|Those who deny My existence and die with such attitude will be subject to the condemnation of God, the angels, and all people
2|162|They will live condemned forever, will have no relief from the torment, and no attention will be paid to them
2|163|Our Lord is the only Lord. There is no God but He, the Beneficent and Merciful
2|164|The creation of the heavens and the earth, the alternation of nights and days, the ships that sail in the sea for the benefit of the people, the water that God sends from the sky to revive the dead earth where He has scattered all kinds of animals, the winds of all directions, and the clouds rendered for service between the sky and the earth are all evidence (of His existence) for those who use their reason
2|165|Some people consider certain things equal to God and love them just as one should love God. However, the strongest of the believers' love is their love of God. Had the unjust been able to reflect about their condition, when facing the torment, they would have had no doubt that to God belongs All-power and that He is stern in His retribution
2|166|When the leaders see the torment and lose all their resources, they will denounce their followers
2|167|The followers will say, "Had we had the chance we also would have denounced our leaders." That is how God will show them their regrettable deeds. They will not be able to escape from hell fire
2|168|People, eat of the good and lawful things on earth. Do not follow the footsteps of Satan; he is clearly your enemy
2|169|He tries to make you do evil and shameful things and speak against God without knowledge
2|170|When some people are asked to follow the revelations of God, they say, "We would rather follow what our fathers have followed," even though their fathers had no understanding and could not find the true guidance
2|171|Preaching to unbelievers is like talking to someone who cannot hear anything except yells and shouts. They are deaf, dumb, and blind; they have no understanding
2|172|Believers, eat from the good things that We have given you and give thanks to God if you worship only Him
2|173|God has forbidden you to eat that which has not been properly slaughtered, blood, pork, and the flesh of any animal which has not been consecrated with a mention of the Name of God. However, in an emergency, without the intention of transgression or repeating transgression, one will not be considered to have committed a sin. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
2|174|Those who receive some small gain by hiding the Books which God has revealed, have, in fact, filled up their stomachs with fire. God will not speak with them on the Day of Judgment, nor will He purify them; instead, they will face a painful torment
2|175|They have exchanged guidance for error and forgiveness for torment. What makes them seek the fire so earnestly (for they are doomed to be punished)
2|176|God has revealed the Book in all Truth and those who dispute it are filled with malice which has taken them far away from the truth
2|177|Righteousness is not determined by facing East or West during prayer. Righteousness consists of the belief in God, the Day of Judgment, the angels, the Books of God, His Prophets; to give money for the love of God to relatives, orphans, the destitute, and those who are on a journey and in urgent need of money, beggars; to set free slaves and to be steadfast in prayer, to pay the religious tax (zakat) to fulfill one's promises, and to exercise patience in poverty, in distress, and in times of war. Such people who do these are truly righteous and pious
2|178|Believers, in case of murder, the death penalty is the sanctioned retaliation: a free man for a free man, a slave for a slave, and a female for a female. However, if the convicted person receives pardon from the aggrieved party, the prescribed rules of compensation must be followed accordingly. This is a merciful alteration from your Lord. Whoever transgresses against it will face a painful punishment
2|179|People of understanding, the law of the death penalty as retaliation grants you life so that perhaps you will have fear of God
2|180|If one of you facing death can leave a legacy, he should bequeath it to his parents and relatives, according to the law. This is the duty of the pious
2|181|Whoever intentionally changes the will of a deceased person, he has committed a sin. God is All-hearing and All-knowing
2|182|One who is afraid of the testator's deviations and sin and settles the matter among the parties involved, he has not committed a sin. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
2|183|Believers, fasting has been made mandatory for you as it was made mandatory for the people before you, so that you may have fear of God
2|184|Fasting is only for a certain number of days. One who is sick or on a journey has to fast the same number of days at another time. Those who can afford a redemption should feed a poor person. Good deeds performed on one's own initiative will be rewarded. However, fasting is better and will be rewarded. Would that you knew this
2|185|The month of Ramadan is the month in which the Quran was revealed; a guide for the people, the most authoritative of all guidance and a criteria to discern right from wrong. Anyone of you who knows that the month of Ramadan has begun, he must start to fast. Those who are sick or on a journey have to fast the same number of days at another time. God does not impose any hardship upon you. He wants you to have comfort so that you may complete the fast, glorify God for His having given you guidance, and that, perhaps, you would give Him thanks
2|186|(Muhammad), if any of My servants ask you about Me, tell them that the Lord says, "I am near; I accept the prayers of those who pray." Let My servants answer My call and believe in Me so that perhaps they may know the right direction
2|187|It is made lawful for you, during the nights of fasting, to have carnal relations with your wives. They are your garments and you are their garments. God knew that you were deceiving yourselves. He relented towards you and forgave you. Now it is lawful for you to have carnal relations with your wives and follow what God has commanded. Eat and drink until the white streak of dawn becomes distinguishable from darkness. Complete your fast, starting from dawn to dusk. It is not lawful to have carnal relations with your wives during i'tikaf in the mosque. Such are the limits of the laws of God. Do not come close to transgressing them. Thus has God explained His evidence to men so that perhaps they will have fear of God
2|188|Do not use your property among yourselves in illegal ways and then deliberately bribe the rulers with your property so that you may wrongly acquire the property of others
2|189|(Muhammad), they ask you about the different phases of the moon. Tell them that they are there to indicate to people the phases of time and the pilgrimage season. It is not a righteous act to enter houses from the back. Righteousness is to be pious and enter the houses from the front door. Have fear of God so that perhaps you will have lasting happiness
2|190|Fight for the cause of God, those who fight you, but do not transgress, for God does not love the transgressors
2|191|Slay them wherever you may catch them and expel them from the place from which they expelled you. The sin of disbelief in God is greater than committing murder. Do not fight them in the vicinity of the Sacred Mosque in Mecca unless they start to fight. Then slay them for it is the recompense that the disbelievers deserve
2|192|If they give up disbelief and fighting, God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
2|193|Fight them so that there will be no disbelief in God and God's religion will become dominant. If they change their behavior, there would be no hostility against anyone except the unjust
2|194|It is because of their disrespect of a sacred month that you are also allowed to retaliate against them in a sacred month. If any one transgresses against you, you also may retaliate against them to an equal extent. Have fear of God and know that He supports the pious
2|195|Give money for the cause of God but do not push yourselves into perdition. Do good; God loves the people who do good deeds
2|196|Complete the hajj and umrah (two parts of the rituals of pilgrimage to Makka) in obedience to God. If you are prevented from completing the duty of hajj, offer whatever sacrifice is possible and do not shave your heads before the sacrificial animal is delivered to the prescribed place. If one of you is ill or is suffering because of some ailment in your head, you must redeem the shaving of the head by fasting, or paying money, or offering a sheep as a sacrifice. When all is well with you and you want to complete the umrah in the hajj season, offer whatever sacrifice is possible. If you do not find an animal, you have to fast for three days during the days of the pilgrimage rituals and seven days at home to complete the required ten fasting days. This rule is for those who live beyond (a distance of twelve miles from) the Sacred Mosque in Mecca. Have fear of God and know that He is stern in His retribution
2|197|The months of the hajj (pilgrimage) season are well known. Whoever undertakes to complete the hajj rituals, must know that, after commencing the acts of Hajj, he is not allowed to have carnal relations or to lie or to swear by the Name of God. God knows all your good deeds. Supply yourselves for the journey. The best supply is piety. People of understanding have fear of Me
2|198|It is not a sin if you try to make a profit out of the bounty of your Lord (by trading during hajj). When you leave Arafah, commemorate the name of your Lord in Mash'ar, the sacred reminder of God. Commemorate His name as He has given you guidance while prior to that you had been in error
2|199|Then leave Mash'ar as the rest of the people do and ask forgiveness from God; He is All-forgiving and All-merciful
2|200|After you complete the acts of your Hajj, also commemorate God, just as you would remember your father, or even more earnestly. Some people say, "Lord, give us what we want in this life," but in the life hereafter they have no beneficial share
2|201|Others pray, "Lord, give us good things both in this life as well as in the life hereafter and save us from the torment of fire
2|202|They will have their share of the reward for their deeds. God's reckoning is swift
2|203|Commemorate (the names of) God in the prescribed days. For one who observes piety, it is not a sin to be hasty or tardy during the two days. Have fear of God and know that before Him you will all be raised after death
2|204|There are some people whose words about this life may please you. They say that God knows what they have in their hearts. But, in fact, they are the most quarrelsome opponents
2|205|As soon as they leave you, they quickly commit evil in the land, destroying the farms and people. God does not love evil
2|206|When they are asked to have fear of God, sinful pride prevents them from paying heed to such advice. It is enough for them to have hell as a terrible dwelling place
2|207|There are those among people who give their lives to seek God's pleasure. God is Affectionate to His servants
2|208|Believers, submit yourselves to the will of God as a whole. Do not follow the footsteps of Satan; he is your sworn enemy
2|209|If you are seduced after you have received the authoritative guidance, know that God is Majestic and Wise
2|210|Have they decided not to believe until God comes down in a shadow of clouds with the angels so that then the matter is settled? To God do all matters return
2|211|(Muhammad), ask the children of Israel about how many visible miracles We had shown them. God is certainly stern in His retribution to those who change the bounty of God (His revelation), after having received His guidance
2|212|The worldly life is made to seem attractive to the disbelievers who scoff at the faithful, but the pious, in the life hereafter, will have a position far above them. God grants sustenance (without account) to anyone He wants
2|213|At one time all people were only one nation. God sent Prophets with glad news and warnings. He sent the Book with them for a genuine purpose to provide the people with the ruling about disputed matters among them. No one disputed this matter except those who had already received evidence before. Their dispute was only because of their own hostility. To deal with this dispute, God, through His will, sent guidance to the believers. God guides to the right path whomever He wants
2|214|Would you think that you could go to Paradise without experiencing the kind of suffering others have experienced before you? Distress and afflictions battered them until the Messenger and the believers said, "When will God send help?" Certainly God's help is near
2|215|They ask you what to spend for the cause of God. (Muhammad) tell them that whatever you spend, give it to your parents, the orphans, the destitute, and those who may be in urgent need of money whilst on a journey. Whatever good you do, God certainly is Aware of it
2|216|Fighting is made mandatory for you, but you dislike it. You may not like something which, in fact, is for your good and something that you may love, in fact, may be evil. God knows, but you do not know
2|217|(Muhammad), they ask you about fighting in the sacred month. Tell them that it is a great sin. However, creating an obstacle in the way of God, disbelief in Him and the Sacred Mosque, and driving away the neighbors of the Sacred Mosque is an even greater sin in the sight of God: Disbelief in God is worse than committing murder. (The pagans) still try to fight you to make you give up your religion. The deeds in this life of those of you who give up their religion and who die disbelievers will be made void and in the life hereafter. These people will be the dwellers of Hell wherein they will remain forever
2|218|The believers and the Emigrants from Mecca who fight for the cause of God, indeed have hope in receiving the mercy of God; God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
2|219|(Muhammad), they ask you about wine and gambling. Tell them that there is great sin in them. Although they have benefits for men, the sin therein is far greater than the benefit. They ask you about what they should give for the cause of God. Tell them, "Let it be what you can spare." This is how God explains for you His guidance so that perhaps you will think
2|220|about this life and the life hereafter. They ask you about the orphans. Tell them, "The best thing to do is what is for their good. They are your brethren if you would associate with them. God knows who is corrupt or a reformer. Had God wanted He would have brought upon you hardship. God is Majestic and All-wise
2|221|Do not marry pagan women unless they believe in God. A believing slave girl is better than an idolater, even though the idolaters may attract you. Do not marry pagan men unless they believe in God. A believing slave is better than an idolater, even though the idolater may attract you. The pagans invite you to the fire, but God invites you to Paradise and forgiveness through His will. God shows His evidence to people so that they may take heed
2|222|They ask you about women's menses. Tell them, "It is an ailment. Avoid having carnal relations with them until their period is over." Then you may have carnal relations with them according to the rules of God. God loves those who repent and those who purify themselves
2|223|Your wives are as fields for you. You may enter your fields from any place you want. Reserve something good for your souls (for the life hereafter). Have fear of God and know that you are going to meet Him. (Muhammad) give the glad news to the believers
2|224|Do not swear by God not to do good things, or have piety, or make peace among people. God is All-hearing and All-knowing
2|225|God will not take into account your inattentive oath. However, He will question you about what your hearts have gained. God is All-forgiving and Lenient
2|226|Those who swear by God not to ever have any carnal relations with their wives (will not be punished), if they decide to resume marital relations again within four months. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
2|227|If they choose divorce, God is All-hearing and All-knowing
2|228|The divorced women must wait up to three menstrual cycles before another marriage. If they believe in God and the Day of Judgment, it is not lawful for them to hide what God has created in their wombs. Within their waiting period their husbands have the right to resume marital relations, if they want reconciliation. Women have benefits as well as responsibilities. Men have a status above women. God is Majestic and Wise
2|229|A marital relation can only be resumed after the first and second divorce, otherwise it must be continued with fairness or terminated with kindness. It is not lawful for you to take back from women what you have given them unless you are afraid of not being able to observe God's law. In this case, it would be no sin for her to pay a ransom to set herself free from the bond of marriage. These are the laws of God. Do not transgress against them; those who do so are unjust
2|230|After a divorce for the third time, it is not lawful for the husband to resume marital relations with her or remarry her until she has been married and divorced by another husband. In that case, there is no sin for the former husband to marry her if they (both) think that they can abide by the law. These are the laws of God. He explains them for the people of knowledge
2|231|When you divorce your wives and their waiting period has almost ended, you may resume marital relations with honor or leave them with kindness. Do not force them to live with you in suffering to satisfy your hostility. Whoever commits such transgressions, he has only harmed himself. Do not make jest of God's words. Remember the favors that God has done to you and the Book and wisdom He has revealed for your guidance. Have fear of God and know that God has knowledge of all things
2|232|When the waiting period of the divorced women has ended, you (her relatives) must not prevent them from marrying their (previous) husbands again if they might reach an honorable agreement. This is an advice for those of you who believe in God and the Day of Judgment. It is the most beneficial and pure way of treating each other. God knows but you do not know
2|233|Mothers will breast feed their babies for two years if the fathers want them to complete this term. The father has to pay them reasonable expenses. No soul is responsible for what is beyond its ability. None of the parents should suffer any loss from the other because of the baby. The heirs are responsible to look after the children of a deceased. It is no sin for the parents to have a mutual agreement about weaning the baby. There is no sin in hiring a woman to breast feed your children for a reasonable payment. Have fear of God and know that God is well aware of what you do
2|234|The wives of those of you who die have to wait for a period of four months and ten days. After this appointed time, it is no sin for the relatives of the deceased to let the widows do what is reasonable. God knows well what you do
2|235|It is not a sin if you make an indirect marriage proposal or have such an intention in your hearts. God knows that you will cherish their memories in your hearts. Do not have secret dates unless you behave lawfully. Do not decide for a marriage before the appointed time is over. Know that God knows what is in your hearts. Have fear of Him and know that He is All-forgiving and All-merciful
2|236|Also, it is not a sin if you divorce your wives before the consummation of the marriage or the fixing of the dowry. But the dowry will be due from a husband whether he is rich or poor. It is payable in a reasonable amount according to the husband's financial ability. This is an obligation for the righteous ones
2|237|If you divorce your wives before the consummation of the marriage and the amount of dowry has been fixed, pay your wives half of the amount of their dowry unless she or her guardians drop their demand for payment. To drop such a demand is closer to piety. Be generous to each other. God is Well-Aware of what you do
2|238|Pay due attention to your prayers, especially the middle prayer and stand up while praying, in obedience to God
2|239|In an emergency you may say your prayers while walking or riding; but when you are safe, remember God, as He has taught you what you did not know before
2|240|Those who are about to die and leave widows behind should bequeath for their wives the expenses of one year's maintenance. The widows must not be expelled from the house for up to one year. It is no sin for the relatives of the deceased to permit the widows to leave the house before the appointed time and do what is reasonable. God is Majestic and Wise
2|241|The divorced women have the right to receive reasonable provisions. It is an obligation for the pious
2|242|Thus does God explain His revelations to you so that perhaps you will have understanding
2|243|(Muhammad), consider the thousands who left their homes for fear of death, who were then caused by God to die and brought back to life. God is generous to men but most people are not grateful
2|244|Fight for the cause of God and know that God is All-hearing and All-knowing
2|245|One who generously lends to God will be paid back in many multiples of the loan. It is God who reduces and expands things and to Him you will all return
2|246|(Muhammad), remember that group of the Israelites after Moses who demanded a Prophet of their own to appoint a king for them who would lead them in the fight for the cause of God. Their Prophet then said, "What if you are ordered to fight and you disobey?" They said, "Why should we not fight for the cause of God when we and our sons have been expelled from our homes?" However, when they were ordered to fight, all refused except a few among them. God knows well the unjust
2|247|Their Prophet said, "God has appointed Saul as a king for you." They replied, "How can he dominate us when we deserve more to be king than he. Besides, he does not have abundant wealth." Their Prophet said, "God has chosen him as your ruler and has given him physical power and knowledge. God grants His authority to anyone whom He wants. God is Provident and All-knowing
2|248|Their Prophet further told them, "As the evidence of his authority, he will bring to you the Ark which will be a comfort to you from your Lord and a legacy of the household of Moses and Aaron. It will be carried by the angels. This is the evidence for you if you have faith
2|249|When Saul set forth with the army he said, "God will test you with a river. Those who drink its water will not be of my people and those who do not even taste the water or who only taste some of it from within the hollow of their hand, will be my friends. They all drank the water except a few of them. When Saul and those who believed in him crossed the river, his people said, "We do not have the strength to fight against Goliath and his army." Those who thought that they would meet God said, "How often, with God's permission, have small groups defeated the large ones?" God is with those who exercise patience
2|250|Advancing towards Goliath and his army, they prayed to God for patience, steadfastness in battle, and for victory over the unbelievers
2|251|They defeated their enemy through God's will. David slew Goliath and God granted David the kingdom and wisdom and also taught him whatever He wanted. Had God not made one group of people repel the other, the earth would have become full of corruption, but God is generous to His creatures
2|252|(Muhammad), these are the revelations which We recite to you for a genuine purpose. Certainly you are one of Our Messengers
2|253|We gave some of Our Messengers preference over others. To some of them God spoke and He raised the rank of some others. We gave authoritative proofs to Jesus, son of Mary, and supported him by the Holy Spirit. Had God wanted, the generations who lived after those Messengers would not have fought each other after the authority had come to them. But they differed among themselves, some of them believed in the authority and others denied it. They would not have fought each other had God wanted, but God does as He wills
2|254|Believers, out of what We have given you, spend for the cause of God before the coming of the day when there will be no trading, no friendship, and no intercession. Those who deny the Truth are unjust
2|255|God exists. There is no God but He, the Everlasting and the Guardian of life. Drowsiness or sleep do not seize him. To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. No one can intercede with Him for others except by His permission. He knows about people's present and past. No one can grasp anything from His knowledge besides what He has permitted them to grasp. The heavens and the earth are under His dominion. He does not experience fatigue in preserving them both. He is the Highest and the Greatest
2|256|There is no compulsion in religion. Certainly, right has become clearly distinct from wrong. Whoever rejects the devil and believes in God has firmly taken hold of a strong handle that never breaks. God is All-hearing and knowing
2|257|God is the Guardian of the believers and it is He who takes them out of darkness into light. The Devil is the guardian of those who deny the Truth and he leads them from light to darkness. These are the dwellers of hell wherein they will live forever
2|258|(Muhammad), have you heard about the one who argued with Abraham about his Lord for His granting him authority? Abraham said, "It is only my Lord who gives life and causes things to die." His opponent said, "I also can give life and make things die." Abraham said, "God causes the sun to come up from the East. You make it come from the West." Thus the unbeliever was confounded. God does not guide the unjust people
2|259|(Or have you heard) of the one who, on passing through an empty and ruined town, said, "When will God bring it to life?" God caused him to die and brought him back to life after a hundred years and then asked him, "How long have you been here?" He replied, "One day or part of a day." The Lord said, "No, you have been here for one hundred years. Look at your food and drink. They have not yet decayed. But look at your donkey and its bones. To make your case evidence (of the Truth) for the people, see how we bring the bones together and cover them with flesh." When he learned the whole story, he said, "Now I know that God has power over all things
2|260|When Abraham prayed, "Lord, show me how you bring the dead back to life," the Lord said, "Do you not yet believe?" Abraham replied, "I believe but want more confidence for my heart." God told him, "Take four birds, induce them to come to you, cut and scatter their bodies leaving parts on every mountain top, then call them and they will swiftly come to you." Know that God is Majestic and Wise
2|261|Spending money for the cause of God is as the seed from which seven ears may grow, each bearing one hundred grains. God gives in multiples to those whom He wants. God is Munificent and All-knowing
2|262|Those who spend their property for the cause of God and do not make the recipient feel obliged or insulted shall receive their reward from God. They will have no fear nor will they be grieved
2|263|Instructive words and forgiveness are better than charity that may cause an insult to the recipient. God is Rich and Forbearing
2|264|Believers, do not make your charities fruitless by reproachfully reminding the recipient of your favor or making them feel insulted, like the one who spends his property to show off and who has no faith in God or belief in the Day of Judgment. The example of his deed is as though some soil has gathered on a rock and after a rain fall it turns hard and barren. Such people can not benefit from what they have earned. God does not guide the unbelievers
2|265|The example of those who spend their property to please God out of their firm and sincere intention is as the garden on a fertile land which, after a heavy rainfall or even a drizzle, yields double produce. God is Well-Aware of what you do
2|266|(What do you think of the case) of one of you who wishes to have a garden of palm-trees and grapes with water flowing therein and producing all kinds of fruits, especially if he is well advanced in age and has weak children who need support, and then a hurricane with fire in it strikes the garden and burns it to the ground? This is how God explains to you His evidence so that you may think
2|267|Believers, spend for the cause of God from the good things that you earn and from what we have made the earth yield for you. Do not even think of spending for the cause of God worthless things that you yourselves would be reluctant to accept. Know that God is Self-sufficient and Glorious
2|268|Satan threatens you with poverty and commands you to commit sin. God promises you forgiveness and favors. God is Munificent and All-knowing
2|269|God gives wisdom to anyone whom He wants. Whoever is given wisdom, certainly, has received much good. Only people of reason can grasp this
2|270|God knows all about whatever you spend for His cause or any vows that you make. The unjust people have no helper
2|271|It is not bad to give alms in public. However if you give them privately to the poor, it would be better for you and an expiation for some of your sins. God is Well-Aware of what you do
2|272|(Muhammad), you do not have to guide them. God guides whomever He wants. Whatever you spend for the cause of God is for your own good, provided you do not spend anything but to please God. For anything good that you may give for the cause of God, you will receive sufficient reward and no injustice will be done to you
2|273|(If the recipients of charity are) the poor whose poverty, because of their striving for the cause of God, has become an obstacle for them, and who do not have the ability to travel in the land, they seem rich compared to the ignorant, because of their modest behavior. You would know them by their faces. They would never earnestly ask people for help. God knows well whatever wealth you spend for the cause of God
2|274|Those who spend their property for the cause of God, any time during the day or night, in public or in private, will receive their reward from their Lord. There will be no fear for them nor will they grieve
2|275|Those who take unlawful interest will stand before God (on the Day of Judgment) as those who suffer from a mental imbalance because of Satan's touch; they have said that trade is just like unlawful interest. God has made trade lawful and has forbidden unlawful interest. One who has received advice from his Lord and has stopped committing sins will be rewarded for his previous good deeds. His affairs will be in the hands of God. But one who turns back to committing sins will be of the dwellers of hell wherein he will live forever
2|276|God makes unlawful interest devoid of all blessings and causes charity to increase. God does not love sinful unbelievers
2|277|The righteously striving believers who are steadfast in their prayers and pay the zakat, will receive their reward from God. They will have no fear nor will they grieve
2|278|Believers, have fear of God and give up whatever unlawful interest you still demand from others, if you are indeed true believers
2|279|If you will not give up the unlawful interest which you demand, know that you are in the state of war with God and His Messenger. But if you repent, you will have your capital without being wronged or having done wrong to others
2|280|One who faces hardship in paying his debts must be given time until his financial condition improves. Would that you knew that waiving such a loan as charity would be better for you
2|281|Safeguard yourselves against the day when you will return to God and every soul will be rewarded according to its deeds without being wronged
2|282|Believers, if you take a loan for a known period of time, have a just scribe write it down for you. The scribe should not refuse to do this as God has taught him. The debtor should dictate without any omission and have fear of God, his Lord. If the debtor is a fool, a minor, or one who is unable to dictate, his guardian should act with justice as his representative. Let two men or one man and two women whom you choose, bear witness to the contract so that if one of them makes a mistake the other could correct him. The witness must not refuse to testify when their testimony is needed. Do not disdain writing down a small or a large contract with all the details. A written record of the contract is more just in the sight of God, more helpful for the witness, and a more scrupulous way to avoid doubt. However, if everything in the contract is exchanged at the same time, there is no sin in not writing it down. Let some people bear witness to your trade contracts but the scribe or witness must not be harmed; it is a sin to harm them. Have fear of God. God teaches you. He has knowledge of all things
2|283|If you are on a journey where you cannot find a scribe, finalize your contract in the form of a deposit in which the goods are already given to the parties. If you trust each other in such a contract, let him pay back what he has entrusted you with and have fear of God, his Lord. Do not refuse to testify to what you bore witness. Whoever does so has committed a sin. God knows what you do
2|284|God belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth. God will call you to account for all that you may reveal from your souls and all that you may conceal. God will forgive or punish whomever He wants. God has power over all things
2|285|The Messengers and the believers have faith in what was revealed to them from their Lord. Everyone of them believed in God, His angels, His Books, and His Messengers, saying, "We find no difference among the Messengers of God." They also have said, "We heard God's commands and obeyed them. Lord, we need Your forgiveness and to You we shall return
2|286|God does not impose on any soul a responsibility beyond its ability. Every soul receives whatever it gains and is liable for whatever it does. Lord, do not hold us responsible for our forgetfulness and mistakes. Lord, do not lay upon us the burden that You laid on those who lived before us. Lord, do not lay on us what we cannot afford. Ignore and forgive our sins. Have mercy on us. You are our Lord. Help us against the unbelievers
3|1|Alif. Lam. Mim
3|2|God exists. He is the only Lord, the Everlasting and the Guardian of life
3|3|He has sent the Book (Quran) to you (Muhammad) in all Truth. It confirms the original Bible. He revealed the Torah and the Gospel
3|4|before as a guide for the people and now He has revealed the criteria of discerning right from wrong. Those who reject the revelations of God will face the most severe torment. God is Majestic and capable to revenge
3|5|Nothing in the heavens or the earth is hidden from God
3|6|It is God who shapes you in the wombs as He wills. He is the only Lord, the Majestic, and All-wise
3|7|It is God who has revealed the Book to you in which some verses are clear statements (which accept no interpretation) and these are the fundamental ideas of the Book, while other verses may have several possibilities. Those whose hearts are perverse, follow the unclear statements in pursuit of their own mischievous goals by interpreting them in a way that will suit their own purpose. No one knows its true interpretations except God and those who have a firm grounding in knowledge say, "We believe in it. All its verses are from our Lord." No one can grasp this fact except the people of reason
3|8|They say, "Lord, do not cause our hearts to deviate from Your guidance, and grant us mercy. You are the Most Awarding One
3|9|Lord, it is certain that one day You will gather all the people together. God does not break His promise
3|10|The wealth and children of the unbelievers will never serve them as a substitute for their belief in God. Such people will be the fuel for the fire
3|11|They do as the people of Pharaoh and those who lived before them did. They called Our revelations mere lies. God punished them for their sins. God is stern in His retribution
3|12|(Muhammad), tell the unbelievers that they will soon be defeated and driven into Hell, a terrible dwelling
3|13|There, certainly, is evidence (of the existence of God) for you in the case of the two armies. One of them fought for the cause of God. The other were disbelievers. The disbelievers appeared to be twice the size of the believers. However, God supports through His help whomever He wants. It is a good lesson for the people of true vision
3|14|Worldly desires, wives, children, accumulated treasures of gold and silver, horses of noble breed, cattle, and farms are all made to seem attractive to men. All these are the bounties of the worldly life but in the life to come God has the best place for people to dwell
3|15|(Muhammad), ask them, "Shall I tell you what is far superior to worldly pleasures? Those who have fear of God will have (as their reward) gardens wherein streams flow and wherein they will live forever with their purified spouses and with the consent of God. God knows all about His servants
3|16|(Such will be the reward of) those who say, "Lord, we have believed in you. Forgive us our sins and save us from the torment of fire
3|17|who exercise patience, speak the truth, who are devoted in prayer, spend their property for the cause of God and seek forgiveness from God during the last part of the night
3|18|God Himself testifies that He is the only Lord. The angels and the men of knowledge and justice testify that God is the only Lord, the Majestic, and All-wise
3|19|In the sight of God Islam is the religion. The People of the Book created differences in the matters (of religion) because of their hostility among themselves, only after knowledge had come to them. Let whoever denies the revelations of God know that the reckoning of God is swift
3|20|(Muhammad), if the People of the Book argue against you, say, "I and those who follow me have submitted ourselves to God." Ask the People of the Book and the illiterate ones, "Have you embraced Islam?" If they embrace Islam, they will find guidance but if they turn away, your task is just to preach. God knows all about His servants
3|21|Warn those who deny the revelations of God and unjustly slay the Prophets and those who call people to be just, that they will suffer a painful torment
3|22|The deeds of such people are made devoid of all virtue in both this life and the life to come. There will be no one to help them
3|23|(Muhammad), consider those who have received a share of the Book. When they refer to the Book in order to judge amongst themselves, a group of them turn away with disregard
3|24|because of their belief that the fire will only touch them for a few days. This fabricated belief has deceived them in matters of their religion
3|25|What will happen to their belief when We bring them together on the Inevitable Day when every soul will be justly recompensed for its deeds
3|26|(Muhammad), say, "Lord, Owner of the Kingdom, You give authority to whomever You want and take it away from whomever You want. You give honor to whomever You want and humiliate whomever You want. In Your hands is all virtue and You have power over all things
3|27|You cause the day to enter into the night and the night to enter into the day. You cause the living to come out of the dead and the dead to come out of the living. You give sustenance to whomever You want without keeping an account
3|28|The believers must not establish friendship with the unbelievers in preference to the faithful. Whoever does so has nothing to hope for from God unless he does it out of fear or taqiyah (pious dissimulation). God warns you about Himself. To God do all things return
3|29|(Muhammad), tell them, "God knows all that you may conceal in your hearts or you may reveal. He knows all that is in the heavens and the earth. He has power over all things
3|30|On the day when every soul will see its good and bad deeds right before its very eyes, it will wish for the longest period of time to separate it from its bad deeds. God warns you about Himself. God is Compassionate to His servants
3|31|(Muhammad), tell them, "If you love God, follow me. God will love you and forgive your sins. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
3|32|Tell them, "Obey God and the Messenger." If they turn away (let it be known) that God does not love the unbelievers
3|33|God chose (and gave distinction to) Adam, Noah, the family of Abraham, and Imran over all the people of the world
3|34|They were the offspring of one another. God is All-hearing and All-seeing
3|35|Remember when Imran's wife prayed to her Lord saying, "I have made a vow to dedicate to Your service whatever is in my womb. Lord, accept it from me. You are All-hearing and All-knowing
3|36|When the baby was born she said, "Lord, it is a female." God knew this. Male and female are not alike. "I have named her Mary. I pray that You will keep her and her offspring safe from Satan, the condemned one
3|37|Her Lord graciously accepted the offer and made Mary grow up, pure, and beautiful. Zachariah took custody of her. Whenever he went to visit her in her place of worship, he would find with her some food. He would ask her, "Where did this food come from?" She would reply, "God has sent it." God gives sustenance to whomever He wants without keeping an account
3|38|Zachariah prayed to his Lord there, saying, "Lord, grant me, by Your Grace, virtuous offspring. You hear all prayers
3|39|When he was standing during prayer in his place of worship, the angels called him saying, "God gives you the glad news of the birth of your son, John who will be a confirmation of (Jesus) the Word of God. He will become a chaste, noble leader and one of the righteous Prophets
3|40|He said, "How can there be a son for me when I am already senile and my wife is barren." The angel replied, "God does as He wills
3|41|Zachariah prayed to God saying, "Lord, show me the evidence (that it is Divine revelation)." The Lord replied, "You must not speak to people for three days except with gestures. Commemorate your Lord often and glorify Him in the early mornings and the evenings
3|42|Behold," the angels told Mary, "God had chosen you, purified you, and given you distinction over all women
3|43|Mary, pray devotedly to your Lord, prostrate yourself before Him and bow down with those who bow down before Him
3|44|(Muhammad), that was some of the news about the unseen, that We have revealed to you. You were not among those who cast lots by throwing their arrows to find out who would take custody of Mary, nor were you among those who disputed the matter
3|45|Behold," the angels told Mary, "God has given you the glad news of the coming birth of a son whom He calls His Word, whose name will be Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, who will be a man of honor in this life and the life to come, and who will be one of the ones nearest to God
3|46|He will speak to the people while in his cradle and preach to them when he will be a man. He will be one of the righteous ones
3|47|(Mary) said, "How can there be a son for me when no mortal has touched me?" The angel replied, "That is how God creates whatever He wants. When He decides to do something He just orders it to exist and it comes into existence
3|48|God will give (Jesus) wisdom and teach him the Book, the Torah, and the Gospel
3|49|He will be a Messenger of God to the Israelites to whom he will say, "I have brought you a miracle from your Lord. I can create for you something from clay in the form of a bird. When I blow into it, it will become a real bird, by the permission of God. I can heal the blind and the lepers and bring the dead back to life, by the permission of God. I can tell you about what you eat and what you store in your homes. This is a miracle for you if you want to have faith
3|50|I testify to what is true in the Torah and make lawful for you some of the things that were made unlawful. I have brought you a miracle from your Lord. Have fear of God and obey me
3|51|God is my Lord as well as yours. Worship Him for this is the right path
3|52|When Jesus found them denying the truth, he said, "Who will help me in the cause of God?" The disciples replied, "We are the helpers of God. We believe in Him. Jesus, bear witness that we have submitted ourselves to His will
3|53|They prayed, "Lord, we have believed in what You have revealed to Your Messenger and we have followed him. Write down our names with those who testify in support of the Truth
3|54|The unbelievers plotted and God planned, but God is a much better planner
3|55|He told Jesus, "I will save you from your enemies, raise you to Myself, keep you clean from the association with the disbelievers, and give superiority to your followers over the unbelievers until the Day of Judgment. On that day you will all return to Me and I shall resolve your dispute
3|56|I shall sternly punish the unbelievers in this life and in the life to come and no one will help them
3|57|However, to the righteously striving believers I shall give their reward in full measure." God does not love the unjust
3|58|(Muhammad), what we recite to you are revelations and words of wisdom
3|59|To God the case of Jesus is as that of Adam whom He created from the earth and then said, "Exist," and Adam came into existence
3|60|(Muhammad, the essence of) the Truth is from your Lord. Never have any doubt about it
3|61|If anyone disputes (your prophesy) after knowledge has come to you, say, "Let each of us bring our children, women, our people, and ourselves to one place and pray to God to condemn the liars among us
3|62|This is the true story (of Jesus). There is no Lord but God. It is God who is Majestic and All-wise
3|63|If they turn away (from the Truth, let it be known that) God knows well the evil-doers
3|64|(Muhammad), say to the People of the Book, "We must come to a common term. Let us worship no one except God, nor consider anything equal to Him, nor regard any of us as our Lord besides God." However, if they turn away from (the Truth), tell them, "Bear witness that we have submitted ourselves to the will of God
3|65|Ask the People of the Book, "Why do you argue about Abraham? The Torah and Gospel were revealed only after him. Why do you not understand
3|66|You even argue about what is already known to you. What can you learn from arguing about that which you have no knowledge? God knows but you do not know
3|67|Abraham was not a Jew or a Christian. He was an upright person who had submitted himself to the will of God. Abraham was not a pagan
3|68|The nearest people to Abraham, among mankind, are those who followed him, this Prophet (Muhammad) and the true believers. God is the Guardian of the true believers
3|69|A group among the People of the Book would love to mislead you but they mislead no one but themselves. However, they do not realize it
3|70|(Muhammad), say, "People of the Book, why do you deny the revelation of God (the Quran) even though you know very well that it is from God
3|71|Why do you mix truth with falsehood and knowingly hide the truth
3|72|Some of the People of the Book say, "Believe in what is revealed to the Muslims during the day only and abandon it in the evening. This will perhaps make them give up their religion
3|73|They also say, "Do not believe anyone except those who follow your religion, so that no one may have what you have received or may argue with you before your Lord." (Muhammad), tell them, "The only guidance is the guidance of God. All favors are in the hands of God. He grants His favors to whomever He wants. He is Munificent and All-knowing
3|74|God grants priority in granting mercy to whomever He wants. God's favors are great
3|75|If you entrust some of the People of the Book, with a large quantity of gold, they will return it to you while if you entrust others among them with a small quantity of gold, they will not give it back to you unless you keep insisting on its return. For they say, "We are not bound to keep our words with the illiterate people," and they themselves knowingly ascribe false statements to God
3|76|Those who keep their promise and observe piety should know that God certainly loves the pious ones
3|77|Those who sell their covenant with God and their promises for a small price will have no share in the life hereafter. God will not speak to them nor will He look at them on the Day of Judgment nor will He purify them. They will face a painful torment
3|78|A group among the People of the Book when reading the Bible, deliberately mispronounce words in order to change their meaning, try to show that what they have read is from the true Bible. In fact, what they have read is not from the true Bible. They say, "What we read is from God." In reality, it is not from God. They knowingly ascribe false statements to God
3|79|God would never give the Book, authority, or prophesy to any person who would tell others to be his servants instead of being the servants of God. He would rather tell them to worship God for they had been teaching and studying the Book
3|80|A Prophet would never order you to take the angels and the Prophets as your Lords. Would he order you to disbelieve after you have submitted yourselves to God
3|81|When God made a covenant with the Prophets, saying, "When I give you the Book and wisdom and a Messenger comes to you who will testify to the guidance which you have received from Me, you must believe in him and help him, then He asked them, "Do you affirm and accept my covenant?" They replied, "Yes, we affirm it." The Lord said, "Then bear witness to this and I shall bear witness with you
3|82|After this, whoever turns away will be of the evil-doers
3|83|Do they want a religion other than the religion of God when all that is in the heavens and the earth have submitted themselves to His will, either by their own free will or by force? To God do all things return
3|84|(Muhammad), say, "We believe in God and in that which has been revealed to us and in that which was revealed to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and their descendants. We believe in that which was given to Moses, Jesus, and the Prophets by their Lord. We make no distinction between them and we have submitted ourselves to the will of God
3|85|No religion other than Islam (submission to the will of God) will be accepted from anyone. Whoever follows a religion other than Islam will be lost on the Day of Judgment
3|86|Why would God guide a people who disbelieves after having had faith, who have found the Messenger to be truthful, and who have received authoritative evidence? God does not guide the unjust
3|87|What they will gain will be the condemnation of God, the angels, and all people
3|88|with which they will live forever. Their torment will not be relieved and no attention will be paid to them
3|89|However, to those who repent afterwards and reform themselves, God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
3|90|Those who disbelieve, after having been believers and increase their disbelief, are lost and their repentance will not be accepted
3|91|From those who have rejected the truth and died in disbelief, no ransom will be accepted even though they may pay a whole earth of gold. They will suffer a painful torment and no one will help them
3|92|You can never have extended virtue and righteousness unless you spend part of what you dearly love for the cause of God. God knows very well whatever you spend for His cause
3|93|All food was lawful for the children of Israel except for what Israel had deemed unlawful for himself before the Torah was revealed. (Muhammad), ask them to bring the Torah and read it, if they are true in their claim (that all food was not unlawful for the children of Israel)
3|94|Whoever ascribes falsehood to God despite of all the evidence is unjust
3|95|(Muhammad), say, "God has spoken the Truth. Follow the upright tradition of Abraham who was not an idolater
3|96|The first house (of worship) that God assigned to men was in Bakka (another name of Mecca). It is a blessed one and a guide for all people
3|97|In (Bakka), there are many clear signs (evidence of the existence of God). Among them is the spot where Abraham stood. Whoever seeks refuge therein will be protected by the laws of amnesty. Those who have the means and ability have a duty to God to visit the House and perform the hajj (pilgrimage) rituals. The unbelievers should know that God is Independent of all creatures
3|98|(Muhammad), ask the People of the Book, "Why do you deny the revelations of God when He is Well-Aware of your dealings
3|99|Ask them, "Why do you create obstacles in the way of God for those who believe in Him, trying to make His way seem crooked when you know that it is straight? God is not unaware of what you do
3|100|Believers, if you obey a certain group among the People of the Book, they will turn you back to disbelief
3|101|How could you turn back to disbelief when the words of God are recited to you and you have in your midst His Messenger? Those who seek the protection of God will certainly be guided to the right path
3|102|Believers, have fear of God as you should and die only as Muslims (having submitted to the will of God)
3|103|All of you united hold fast to the rope of God (the Quran and His Messenger), and recall how He favored you when your hostility to each other had torn you apart. He united your hearts in one faith and through His Grace you became brothers. You were on the verge of falling headlong into the abyss of fire, but God saved you. This is how God explains to you His revelations so that you may have the right guidance
3|104|Let there be a group among you who will invite others to do good deeds, command them to obey the Law, and prohibit them from committing sins. These people will have eternal happiness
3|105|Do not be like those who turned into quarrelling sects after receiving clear authoritative evidence. They will suffer a great torment
3|106|On the day when some faces will become white and others black, God will ask the people with the faces which have become black, "Why did you give up your faith? Now suffer the torment for your disbelief
3|107|The people whose faces have become white will enjoy the mercy of God with which they will live forever
3|108|Such are God's revelations which We explain to you, (Muhammad), for a genuine purpose. God does not want injustice for any of His creatures
3|109|To God belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth and to Him do all things return
3|110|You are the best nation that ever existed among humanity. You command people to good and prohibit them from evil, and you believe in God. Had the People of the Book accepted the faith (Islam), it would certainly have been better for them. Some of them have faith, but most of them are evil doers
3|111|They can never harm you beyond annoyance. In a fight, they will turn back in defeat and they will not be helped
3|112|Humiliation will strike them wherever they seek protection, except when they seek protection from God and the people. They have incurred the wrath of God unto themselves and have been struck with destitution for their rejection of the revelations of God and for unjustly murdering the Prophets. It is all because of their transgression and rebellion
3|113|The People of the Book are not all the same. Some of them are straightforward. They recite the words of God in prostration at night
3|114|They believe in God and the Day of Judgment. They command people to follow good, prohibit others from committing evil and compete with each other in doing good deeds. These are the righteous ones
3|115|They will never be denied the rewards of their good deeds. God knows well about the pious
3|116|The wealth and the children of the unbelievers can never make them independent of God. They are the dwellers of hell wherein they will live forever
3|117|What they spend in this life is like the freezing wind that may strike and destroy the farms of the people who have wronged themselves. God has not done injustice to them, but they have wronged themselves
3|118|Believers, do not expose your privacy to the unbelievers. They like to mislead you and see that you are seriously harmed. Signs of animosity from their mouths have already become audible, but what they hide in their heads is even worse. We have certainly made Our evidence clear, if only you would consider it
3|119|There are people whom you love, but they do not love you, despite your belief in all the (heavenly) Books. On meeting you They proclaim belief on meeting you, but in private, bite their fingers at you in anger. Tell them, "Perish in your rage! God knows well what is in everyone's hearts
3|120|They hate to see your success and rejoice if any misfortune befalls you. If you will be patient and pious, their plots can cause no harm to you. God has control over all their actions
3|121|(Muhammad), remember the morning when you left home to show the believers their position in the battle? God is All-hearing and All-knowing
3|122|Two groups among you almost lost courage despite having God as their Guardian. The believers should always have trust in God
3|123|God gave you victory in the battle of Badr where your forces were much weaker than those of the enemy. Have fear of God so that you may give Him thanks
3|124|Also, remember when you said to the believers, "Is it not enough that your Lord is helping you with a force of three thousand angels sent (from the heavens)
3|125|Certainly, if you have patience and piety, even if the enemy attacks immediately after this, God will help you with another force of five thousand angels, all splendidly (and or distinctly marked) dressed
3|126|The sending of the angels is a glad news from your Lord so that you would have more confidence in Him. No victory is real unless it is from God, the Majestic and All-wise
3|127|(They are sent) to break the power of the unbelievers or disgrace them and make them return after having lost all hope
3|128|(Muhammad), it is not your concern whether He forgives them or punishes them for they are unjust
3|129|To God belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. He may forgive or punish whomever He wants. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
3|130|Believers, do not accept illegal interest in order to increase your wealth many times over. Have fear of God so that you will have everlasting happiness
3|131|Save yourselves from the fire which is prepared for the unbelievers
3|132|Obey God and the Messenger so that you may receive mercy
3|133|Hasten to obtain forgiveness from your Lord and to qualify yourselves for Paradise. Paradise, vast as the heavens and the earth, is prepared for the pious
3|134|who spend their property for the cause of God in prosperity as well as in adversity and who also harness their anger and forgive the people. God loves the righteous ones
3|135|(Paradise) is also for those who, when committing a sin or doing injustice to themselves, remember God and ask Him to forgive their sins. Who can forgive sins besides God? And who do not knowingly persist in their mistakes
3|136|Their reward will be forgiveness from their Lord and gardens wherein streams flow and wherein they will live forever. How blessed is the reward of those who labor
3|137|Different traditions existed in the past. Travel in the land and find out about the fate of those who rejected the Truth
3|138|This (Quran) is a reminder for the people and a guide and advice for the pious
3|139|Do not be discouraged or grieved. You alone will have true dignity if you only are true believers
3|140|If you get hurt, certainly others have also experienced injuries. We have made people pass through the different turns of history so that God would know the true believers, have some of you bear witness to the people's deeds, {God does not love the unjust}
3|141|test the faith of the believers, and deprive the unbelievers of (His) blessings
3|142|Did you think that you could go to Paradise before God knew which of you fought for His cause and which of you bore patience
3|143|You certainly wished to die (for the cause of God) before you actually faced death. Then you faced death (in the battlefield and only a few of you had the true desire to die)
3|144|Muhammad is only a Messenger. There lived other Messengers before him. Should (Muhammad) die or be slain, would you then turn back to your pre-Islamic behavior? Whoever does so can cause no harm to God. God will reward those who give thanks
3|145|No one can die without the permission of God. This is a written decree of the appointed term for life. We shall give worldly gains to whoever wants them. Those who want rewards in the life hereafter will also receive them. We reward those who give thanks
3|146|Many godly people fought to help the Prophets in the cause of God. They did not lose courage, show weakness, or give in when facing hardships in their fight for the cause of God. God loves those who have patience
3|147|The only words that they spoke were, "Lord, forgive our sins and our excess in our dealings, make us steadfast (in the fight for Your cause), and grant us victory over the unbelievers
3|148|God gave them their reward in this world and the best reward of the life to come. God loves the righteous ones
3|149|Believers, if you obey the unbelievers, they will turn you back to disbelief and you will become lost
3|150|God is your Guardian and the best Helper
3|151|We shall cause terror to enter the hearts of the faithless for their considering things equal to God without authoritative evidence. Their abode will be fire, a terrible dwelling for the unjust
3|152|God certainly fulfilled His promise to you when you were fighting the unbelievers, by His permission. Even after We showed you what you wanted, you began to lose courage, started quarreling with each other, and disobeyed God's orders. Some of you want worldly gains and others of you want rewards in the hereafter. Then He let you face defeat in order to test you. However, He forgave you. God is Gracious to the believers
3|153|(Believers remember) when you were fleeing without even glancing to either side even though the Messengers were calling you back, God made you suffer sorrow upon sorrow to make you forget your grief of what you had lost and the injuries you had suffered. God is Well-Aware of what you do
3|154|After the sorrows you suffered, He sent you relief and some of you were encompassed by slumber. To some others of you, your lives were so important that you, like ignorant people, began thinking suspiciously of God saying, "Do we have any say in the matter?" (Muhammad), tell them, "All matters belong to God." They try to hide within their souls what they do not reveal to you. They say, "Had we had the matter in our hands, we would not have been killed there." Tell them, "Even if you had stayed in your own homes, your sworn enemies could have attacked you and slain you while you were in your beds. God wanted to test you and purge what existed in your hearts
3|155|God knows what the hearts contain. Because of some of your bad deeds, those of you who ran away, when you faced the enemy, were misled by Satan. God forgave you for He is All-forgiving and Forbearing
3|156|Believers, do not be like the unbelievers, who said of their brothers who travelled in the land or took part in a fight, "Had they stayed with us, they would not have died or been killed." God will only cause regret to enter their hearts. It is God who gives life and causes people to die. God is Well Aware of what you do
3|157|If you were to die or to be killed for the cause of God, certainly His forgiveness and mercy is far better than your worldly gains
3|158|If you die or are slain, certainly you will all be brought before God
3|159|Only through the Divine Mercy have you (Muhammad) been able to deal with your followers so gently. If you had been stern and hard-hearted, they would all have deserted you a long time ago. Forgive them and ask God to forgive (their sins) and consult with them in certain matters. But, when you reach a decision, trust God. God loves those who trust Him
3|160|If God is your helper, no one can defeat you. However, if He abandons you, who would help you? The true believers trust in God
3|161|No Prophet can ever be treacherous. A treacherous person will be brought before God on the Day of Judgment with his treacherous deeds. Then every soul will be recompensed for its works without being wronged
3|162|Are those who seek God's pleasure equal to those who incur His wrath and whose dwelling will be hell, the terrible destination
3|163|People are of various grades in the sight of God. God is Well-Aware of all that they do
3|164|God granted a great favor to the believers by sending a Messenger from their own people to recite to them God's revelations, to purify them of moral defects, to teach them the Book, and to give them wisdom. Before this they had lived in manifest error
3|165|If misfortune befell you (the believers) your enemies had suffered twice as much (in the battle of Badr) but you asked, "Where did the misfortune come from?" (Muhammad), tell them, "It came from yourselves. God has power over all things
3|166|What befell you, when the two armies confronted each other, was by the permission of God so that He would know who were the true believers
3|167|and who were the hypocrites. When the hypocrites were asked to fight for the cause of God or to defend the city, they replied, "Had we known before that you would fight, we would certainly not have followed you." At that time they were closer to disbelief than to faith. They speak words that do not come from their hearts. God knows well whatever they try to hide
3|168|There are those who themselves did not join the others in fighting for the cause of God and said about their brothers, "Had they listened to us and stayed at home, they would not have been killed." (Muhammad), tell them to save themselves from death if they are true in their claim
3|169|Do not think of those slain for the cause of God as dead. They are alive with their Lord and receive sustenance from Him
3|170|They are pleased with the favor from their Lord and have received the glad news that those who follow them will have no fear nor will they be grieved
3|171|that they will be rewarded with bounties and favors from their Lord and that God will not neglect the reward of the true believers
3|172|The righteous and pious of those who have pledged obedience to God and the Messenger, after injury had befallen them, will receive a great reward
3|173|Such people, when warned to fear those who are gathered against them, are strengthened in their faith and say, "God is All-sufficient as our Guardian
3|174|They returned with the favors and the bounties of God untouched by evil and followed by the pleasure of God. God's favor is great
3|175|It is Satan who frightens his friends. Do not be afraid of them (enemies) but have fear of Me if you truly believe
3|176|(Muhammad), do not be grieved because of some people's haste to disbelieve. They can do no harm to God. God has decided not to give them any share in the life hereafter. There will be a great torment for them
3|177|Those who have traded faith in exchange for disbelief can never do any harm to God. There will be a painful torment for them
3|178|The unbelievers must not think that Our respite is for their good. We only give them time to let them increase their sins. For them there will be a humiliating torment
3|179|God left the believers in their existing state for no other reason than to distinguish the evil-doers from the virtuous ones. God does not inform you of the unseen. He chooses for such information anyone of His Messengers that He wants. Have faith in God and in His Messengers. If you have faith and are pious, there will be a great reward for you
3|180|Those who are avaricious of the favors that God has given them should not think that this is good for them. Avarice is evil and whatever they are avaricious about will be tied to their necks on the Day of Judgment. To God belongs the heritage of the heavens and the earth. God is Well Aware of what you do
3|181|God certainly has heard the words of those who said, "God is poor and we are wealthy". We shall write down what they have said and their murder of the Prophets without reason and We shall tell them to suffer the burning torment
3|182|This is only the result of their deeds. God is not unjust to His servants
3|183|(Muhammad), say to those who say, 'God has commanded us not to believe any Messenger unless he offers a burnt offering,' (Muhammad) say, "Messengers came to you before me with certain miracles and with that which you had asked for (burnt offering). Why, then, did you slay them if you were true in your claim
3|184|If they reject you, they had certainly rejected the Messengers who lived before you and who showed them authoritative evidence, smaller Books, and the Book of enlightenment
3|185|Every soul is destined to experience the agony of death. You (Muslims) will receive the recompense for your deeds on the Day of Judgment. To be saved from the fire and admitted to Paradise is certainly a great triumph. The worldly life is no more than a deceitful possession
3|186|You (believers) will certainly be tested by the loss of your property and lives and you will hear a great many grieving words from the People of the Book and the pagans. If you will have patience and piety, it will be a sign of firm determination and steadfastness (in life)
3|187|When God made a covenant with the People of the Book saying, "Tell the people about it (Muhammad's prophesy) without hiding any part, therefrom, they threw it behind their backs and sold it for a very small price. What a miserable bargain
3|188|Do not think that those who are happy with their possessions and positions and those who love to be praised for what they themselves have not done can ever be saved from torment. For them there will be a painful punishment
3|189|To God belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth and He has power over all things
3|190|The creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the day and the night are evidence (of the existence of God) for people of reason
3|191|It is these who commemorate God while standing, sitting, or resting on their sides and who think about the creation of the heavens and the earth and say, "Lord, you have not created all this without reason. Glory be to you. Lord, save us from the torment of the fire
3|192|Those whom You submit to the fire are certainly disgraced. There is no helper for the unjust
3|193|Lord, we have heard the person calling to the faith and have accepted his call. Forgive our sins, expiate our bad deeds, and let us die with the righteous ones
3|194|Lord, grant us the victory that You have promised your Messenger and do not disgrace us on the Day of Judgment; You are the One who never ignores His promise
3|195|Their Lord answered their prayers saying, "I do not neglect anyone's labor whether the laborer be male or female. You are all related to one another. Those who migrated from Mecca, those who were expelled from their homes, those who were tortured for My cause, and those who fought and were killed for My cause will find their sins expiated by Me and I will admit them into the gardens wherein streams flow. It will be their reward from God Who grants the best rewards
3|196|(Muhammad), do not be deceived by the changing activities of the unbelievers in different parts of the land
3|197|Their gains are only a means of enjoyment in this life. However, their destination is hell, the terrible dwelling
3|198|For those who have fear of their Lord, there will be gardens wherein streams flow and they will live therein forever as a gift from their Lord. God has the best reward for the virtuous people
3|199|There are some among the People of the Book who believe in God and what is revealed to you and to them. They are humble before God and do not trade God's revelations for a small price. They will receive their reward from their Lord. God's reckoning is swift
3|200|Believers, have patience, help each other with patience, establish good relations with one another, and have fear of God so that you may have everlasting happiness
4|1|People, have fear of your Lord who has created you from a single soul. From it He created your spouse and through them He populated the land with many men and women. Have fear of the One by whose Name you swear to settle your differences and have respect for your relatives. God certainly keeps watch over you
4|2|Give to the orphans their property. Do not exchange the pure for the filthy and do not spend the property of orphans along with your own; this would be a great sin
4|3|With respect to marrying widows, if you are afraid of not being able to maintain justice with her children, marry another woman of your choice or two or three or four (who have no children). If you cannot maintain equality with more than one wife, marry only one or your slave-girl. This keeps you from acting against justice
4|4|Pay the women their dowry as though it were a gift. However, if they allow you to keep a part of it as a favor to you, you may spend it with pleasure
4|5|Do not give to people weak of understanding your property for which God has made you to supervise. Feed and clothe such people and speak to them in a reasonable way
4|6|Before returning orphan's property to them, make sure that they have reached maturity. Do not consume their property wastefully until such a time. The rich (guardian) should not take any of his ward's property. However, a poor (guardian) may use a reasonable portion. When you return their property, make sure you have witness. God is a perfect in taking accounts
4|7|Male and female are entitled to their legal share in the legacy of their parents and relatives, whether it be small or large
4|8|If relatives, orphans or destitute people, are present at the distribution of the legacy, give them something and speak kindly to them
4|9|Those who are concerned about the welfare of their own children after their death, should have fear of God (when dealing with the orphans) and guide them properly
4|10|Those who wrongfully consume the property of orphans are, in fact, consuming fire in their bellies and they will suffer the blazing fire
4|11|This is a commandment from your Lord: After the payment of debts or anything bequeathed, let the male inherit twice as much as the female. If there are more than two girls, they will have two-thirds of the legacy. If there is only one girl, she will inherit half of the legacy. Parents of the deceased will each inherit one-sixth of the legacy, if the deceased has a surviving child, however, if no children survive the deceased, and the heirs are the parents, the mother will receive one-third of the legacy. The mother will receive one-sixth of the legacy if the deceased has more than one surviving brother. These are the decreed shares according to the laws of God. Regardless of how you feel about your parents or children, you do not know which of them is more beneficial to you. God is All-knowing and All-wise
4|12|If your wives die without any surviving children, you will inherit half of their legacy. If they have children, you will inherit one-fourth of their legacy after the debts and things bequeathed have been excluded from the legacy. After the payment of debts and things bequeathed have been excluded from the legacy, your wives will inherit one-fourth of your legacy if you have no surviving children. If you leave a child, they will inherit one eighth of your legacy. If the deceased, either male or female, has no surviving heirs such as parents or children but has a brother or a sister, the brother or sister will each inherit one-sixth of the legacy. If there are more than just a brother or a sister, they will share one-third of the legacy. This is after the payment of any debts and things bequeathed have been excluded from the legacy, so that no one will be caused to suffer any loss. It is a guide from God, the All-knowing and Forbearing
4|13|These are the laws of God. Whoever obeys God and His Messenger will be admitted to the gardens wherein streams flow and wherein they will live forever. This is the greatest triumph
4|14|Whoever disobeys God and His Messenger and breaks His rules will be admitted to the fire wherein they will live forever, suffering a humiliating torment
4|15|Those of your women who commit fornication, let four (Muslim) witness testify to their act. If there is sufficient testimony, confine them to their homes until they die, or until God provides a way for their freedom
4|16|If any two people commit fornication, punish them. If they repent and reform, let them go. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
4|17|God will only accept the repentance of those who commit evil in ignorance, if they repent immediately. God is All-knowing and All-wise
4|18|There is no forgiveness for those who commit sin and do not repent until the last moment of their lives nor for those who die as unbelievers. For these people We have prepared a painful torment
4|19|Believers, it is not lawful for you to inherit women against their will as part of the legacy. Do not create difficulties for your wives in order to force them to give-up part of what you had given to them to set themselves free from the bond of marriage, unless they have clearly committed adultery. Always treat them reasonably. If you dislike them, you could be disliking that which God has filled with abundant good
4|20|If you want to divorce a woman so that you can marry another, do not take back the dowry which you had paid even if what you paid was a large amount of gold. To do this is a slanderous act and a manifest sin
4|21|How can you take it back when you have had intimate relations and made a solemn agreement with each other
4|22|Do not marry, from now on, the ex-wives of your fathers for that custom was sinful, loathsome, and abominable
4|23|You are forbidden to marry your mothers, daughters, sisters, paternal aunts, maternal aunts, nieces, your foster-mothers, your foster-sisters, your mothers-in-law, your step-daughters whom you have brought up and with whose mothers you have had carnal relations. It would not be a sin to marry her if you did not have carnal relations with her mother. You are forbidden to marry the wives of your own sons and to marry two sisters at the same time without any adverse affect to the such relations of the past. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
4|24|You are forbidden to marry married women except your slave-girls. This is the decree of God. Besides these, it is lawful for you to marry other women if you pay their dower, maintain chastity and do not commit indecency. If you marry them for the appointed time you must pay their dowries. There is no harm if you reach an understanding among yourselves about the dowry, God is All-knowing and All-wise
4|25|If any of you do not have the means to marry a chaste believing woman, marry your believing slave-girls. God knows best about your faith. You have the same faith. Marry them with the permission of their masters and if they are chaste and have avoided fornication and amorous activities, give them their just dowries. If after marriage they commit adultery, they should receive half of the punishment of a free woman who has committed the same crime. This is for those who fear falling into evil. It is better for you to have self-control. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
4|26|God wants to guide you, explain to you the customs of those who lived before you, and grant you forgiveness. He is All-knowing and All-wise
4|27|God wants to be merciful to you but those who follow their evil desires seek to lead you astray
4|28|God wants to relieve you of your burden; all human beings were created weak
4|29|Believers, do not exchange your property in wrongful ways unless it is in trade by mutual agreement. Do not kill one another. God is All-merciful to you
4|30|Whoever commits murder out of animosity and injustice will be burnt in hell fire. This is a very easy thing for God to do
4|31|If you avoid violating that which has been prohibited, your (lesser) sins will be forgiven and you will be admitted into an exalted dwelling
4|32|Do not envy the favors which God has granted to some of you. Men and women will both be rewarded according to their deeds, rather pray to God for His favors. God knows all things
4|33|We have chosen heirs for every legacy that parents and relatives may leave. Let those who have been promised a bequest receive their share of the legacy. God is Omnipresent
4|34|Men are the protectors of women because of the greater preference that God has given to some of them and because they financially support them. Among virtuous women are those who are steadfast in prayer and dependable in keeping the secrets that God has protected. Admonish women who disobey (God's laws), do not sleep with them and beat them. If they obey (the laws of God), do not try to find fault in them. God is High and Supreme
4|35|If there appears to be discord between a wife and her husband and if they desire reconciliation choose arbiters from the families of both sides. God will bring them together; God is All-knowing and All-aware
4|36|Worship God and consider no one equal to Him. Be kind to your parents, relatives, orphans, the destitute, your near and distant neighbors, your companions, wayfarers, and your slaves. God does not love the proud and boastful ones
4|37|the stingy ones who try to make others stingy or those who hide the favors that God has bestowed on them. We have prepared a humiliating torment for the disbelievers
4|38|those who spend their property out of a desire to show off and not because of their belief in God and the Day of Judgment, and (lastly) those who choose Satan for a friend; what an evil friend
4|39|How could it have harmed them if they had believed in God and the Last Day and spent their property for the cause of God? God knows them very well
4|40|God does not do even an atom's weight of injustice. A good deed is multiplied by God and richly rewarded
4|41|How will it be when We call for a witness from every nation and have you, (Muhammad), testify against them all
4|42|At that time the disbelievers who disobeyed the Messenger will wish that they could be turned into dust and they will be able to hide nothing from God
4|43|Believers, do not pray when you are drunk, but, instead, wait until you can understand what you say. Also, do not pray when you have experienced a seminal discharge until after you have taken a bath, unless you are on a journey. If, while sick or on a journey, you can find no water after having defecated or after having had carnal relations, perform tayammum by touching your palms on the pure earth and wipe the (upper part of) your face and the backs of your hands. God is Gracious and All-forgiving
4|44|Have you seen those who had received a portion of the Book trade misguidance and try to make you, too, go astray
4|45|God knows who are your enemies. You need to have no guardian or helper other than God
4|46|Some Jews take certain words out of context and by twisting their tongues to make a jest out of the true religion, say, "We heard and (in our hearts) disobeyed. (Muhammad) ra`ina (be kind to us) but they intend thereby (the meaning in their own language): "Listen! May God turn you deaf." They should have said, "We heard and obeyed. (Muhammad) listen and consider our question." This would have been better for them and more righteous. God has condemned them for their disbelief, thus, no one, except a few among them, will have faith
4|47|People of the Book, have faith in the Quran that We have revealed to confirm your Book, before certain faces are changed and turned back. We shall condemn them as We did the people of the Sabbath about whom God's decree had decisively been ordained
4|48|God does not forgive the sin of considering others equal to Him, but He may choose to forgive other sins. Whoever believes in other gods besides Him has indulged in a great sin
4|49|(Muhammad), have you seen those who try to purify themselves? They should know that God only purifies whomever He wants and that the slightest wrong will not be done to such people
4|50|Consider how they create lies about God? This alone is a grave sin
4|51|Have you seen how those who had been given a share of the Book believe in idols and Satan and who say, "The disbelievers are better guided than the believers
4|52|God has condemned them. No one can help one who has been condemned by God
4|53|Even if they had a share in the Kingdom (Divine authority), they would not have given the smallest thing to anyone
4|54|Are they jealous of the favors that God has done to some people? We have given to the family of Abraham the Book, Wisdom, and a great Kingdom
4|55|Some have believed, others have disbelieved and tried to prevent people from believing. For these people, only the intense fire of hell is a sufficient punishment
4|56|We will make the rejectors of Our revelations suffer in hell fire. As soon as the fire destroys their skins, We will give them new skins so that they may suffer more of the torment. God is Majestic and All-wise
4|57|We will admit the righteously striving believers into the gardens wherein streams flow. They will live therein forever in a cool shade with their pure spouses
4|58|God commands you to return that which had been entrusted to you to the rightful owners. Be just when passing judgment among people. God's advice is the most noble. He sees and hears everything
4|59|Believers, obey God, His Messenger, and your (qualified) leaders. If you have faith in God and the Day of Judgment, refer to God and His Messenger concerning matters in which you differ. This would be a more virtuous and a better way of settling differences
4|60|(Muhammad), have you seen those who think that they have faith in what is revealed to you and to others before you, yet choose to take their affairs to Satan for judgment even though they are commanded to deny him. Satan wants to lead them far away from the right path
4|61|When the (hypocrites) are told to refer to God's revelations and to the Messenger, they try to find excuses to stay away from you (Muhammad)
4|62|What would happen if they were to be afflicted by a disaster brought about by their own hands? They would then come to you swearing by God, "We only wanted to bring about friendship and reconciliation
4|63|God knows what is in their hearts. (Muhammad), ignore their faults, advise them, and tell them frankly about what is in their souls
4|64|We did not send any Messengers for any reason other than to be obeyed because of the will of God. If they ever do injustice to themselves and come to you (Muhammad) asking for God's forgiveness and if the Messenger also was to ask God to forgive them, they would certainly find God All-forgiving and All-merciful
4|65|I swear by your Lord that they will not be considered believers until they let you judge their disputes and then they will find nothing in their souls to prevent them from accepting your judgment, thus, submitting themselves to the will of God
4|66|Had We commanded them to kill themselves or abandon their homes, only a few of them would have done it. If they had done what they had been advised to do, it would have strengthened their faith
4|67|We would have given them a great reward
4|68|and guided them to the right path
4|69|One who obeys God and the Messenger is the friend of the Prophets, saints, martyrs, and the righteous ones to whom God has granted His favors. They are the best friends that one can have
4|70|The favors of God are such, and He knows very well (how to reward you)
4|71|Believers, always be well prepared and on your guard. March in small groups or all together
4|72|There are some among you who lag behind (in battle) and if you were to experience hardship, they would say, "It was certainly due to God's favors to us that we were not present with them
4|73|but if you were to receive a favor from God, they would certainly say, "(We have been ignored) as if there was no friendship among us. Would that we had been there with them for we would have had a great success
4|74|Those who want to buy the life hereafter with this life should fight for the cause of God. We will give them a great reward whether they are killed or whether they are victorious
4|75|Why do you not fight for the cause of God or save the helpless men, women, and children who cry out, "Lord, set us free from this town of wrong doers and send us a guardian and a helper
4|76|The believers fight for the cause of God. The unbelievers fight for the cause of the Satan. So fight against the friends of Satan for the evil plans of Satan are certainly weak
4|77|Have you not seen those who were told to stop fighting, to say their prayers, and pay the religious tax? When they were ordered to fight, some of them feared other men as much as or more than they feared God and so they said, "Lord, why have you ordered us to fight? If only you would give us a little time." (Muhammad), tell them, "The pleasures of the worldly life are trivial. The life hereafter is best for the pious ones. You will not be treated the slightest bit unjustly
4|78|Wherever you are, death will find you even if you hide yourselves in firmly constructed towers. Whenever people experience good fortune, they say that it is from God but whenever they experience misfortune, they say it is because of you, (Muhammad). Tell them, "Everything is from God." What is wrong with these people that they do not even try to understand
4|79|Whatever good you may receive is certainly from God and whatever you suffer is from yourselves. We have sent you, (Muhammad), as a Messenger to people. God is a Sufficient witness to your truthfulness
4|80|One who obeys the Messenger has certainly obeyed God. You have not been sent to watch over those who turn away from you
4|81|They proclaim obedience to you but as soon as they leave at night, a group of them make secret plans to do the contrary of what you have told them to do. God keeps the record of their nocturnal plans. Therefore, leave them alone and put your trust in God; He is Sufficient for you as your Guardian
4|82|Will they not ponder on the Quran? Had it not come from someone other than God, they would have certainly found therein many contradictions
4|83|When they receive any news of peace or war, they announce it in public. Had they told it to the Messenger or to their (qualified) leaders, they could have used that information more properly. Were it not for the favor and mercy of God, all but a few of them would have followed Satan
4|84|Thus, (Muhammad), fight for the cause of God. You are only responsible for yourself. Rouse the believers and perhaps God will stop the evil designs of the unbelievers. God's punishment and retribution is the most severe
4|85|Whoever intercedes for a good purpose will receive his share of the reward but the intercession for an evil purpose only adds more to one's burden. God has control over all things
4|86|Answer a greeting in kinder words than those said to you in the greeting or at least as kind. God keeps account of all things
4|87|God exists. He is the only Lord. He will gather you all together on the Day of Judgment which will certainly come. Who is more truthful than God
4|88|Why are you divided into two different parties concerning the hypocrites, when God Himself has turned them to disbelief because of their misdeeds. Do you want to guide those whom God has caused to go astray? You cannot find guidance for those whom God has made to err
4|89|They wish you to become unbelievers as they themselves are. Do not establish friendship with them until they have abandoned their homes for the cause of God. If they betray you, seize them and slay them wherever you find them. Do not establish friendship with them or seek their help
4|90|except with those who attach themselves to your allies or come to you with no desire to fight you or their own people. God could have given them power to fight you. Thus, if they retreat, stop fighting and come forward expressing faith in Islam God will not allow you to fight them
4|91|You will soon find others who seek security from you as well as from their own people, but when they are invited to return to idol worship, they do so enthusiastically. Thus, if they do not keep away from you nor come forward with a peace proposal nor desist from harming you, apprehend and slay them wherever you find them, for We have given you full control over them
4|92|A believer cannot slay another believer except by mistake for which the retaliation is to set free a believing slave and pay the appointed blood money to the relatives of the deceased unless the relatives wave aside the payment. If the person slain is from your enemies but himself is a believer, the penalty is to set free a believing slave. If the person slain is one of those with whom you have a peace treaty, the penalty is the same as that for a slain believer. If this is not possible, the defendant has to fast for two consecutive months, asking God to accept his repentance. He is All-knowing and All-wise
4|93|The punishment for one who purposely slays a believer will be to live in hell fire forever. God is angry with him and has condemned him. He has prepared for him a great torment
4|94|Believers, if you march with arms for the cause of God, make sure that you know whom to fight. Do not accuse anyone who claims himself to be a Muslim of disbelief just for worldly gains. There is abundant bounty with God. Before, you were also like them, but God bestowed His favors upon you. Thus, make sure that you know whom to fight. God is Well Aware of what you do
4|95|Among the believers, those who stay at home without a good reason are not equal to those who strive for the cause of God in person or with their property. To those who strive for His cause in person or with their property, God has granted a higher rank than to those who stay at home. God has promised that everyone will receive his proper share of the reward but He will grant a much greater reward to those striving for His cause than to those who stay home (for no reason)
4|96|God will grant those who strive high ranks, forgiveness, and mercy. He is All-forgiving and All-merciful
4|97|When the angels take away from their bodies the souls of those who have wronged themselves, they will ask them, "How did you live?" They will reply, "We lived on earth in weakness and oppression." The angels will say, "Was not God's land vast enough for you to go wherever you could live in peace?" The dwelling of these people will be hell fire, a terrible destination
4|98|As for the really weak and oppressed men, women, and children who were not able to find any means of obtaining their freedom or of having the right guidance
4|99|perhaps God will forgive them; He is All-merciful and All-forgiving
4|100|One who abandons his home for the cause of God will find many places of refuge in the vast land and one who dies, after having abandoned his home to get near to God and His Messenger, will receive his reward from God. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
4|101|When you are on a journey, it is no sin to shorten your prayers if you are afraid of the mischief of the unbelievers. The unbelievers have always been your sworn enemies
4|102|(Muhammad), if you are among them (your followers during a battle) and you call them for prayer, let a group of them carry their arms during prayer. After they have made their prostrations, let them go back to watch the enemy and let the other group who has not yet prayed, join you, carrying their arms with due precaution. The unbelievers would love to find you neglecting your arms and property and would attack you suddenly. If rain or illness make you suffer, you may place your arms aside during prayer but still observe due precaution. God has prepared a humiliating torment for the unbelievers
4|103|When you complete your prayer, remember God all the time while standing, sitting, or reclining. When you are safe, say your prayers properly. It is a constant duty of the believers
4|104|Do not neglect the pursuit of the enemy. If you have suffered, they too have suffered but you can, at least, expect from God what they can never expect. God is All-knowing and All-wise
4|105|We have revealed to you the Book in all Truth so that you judge among people by the laws of God. However, never defend the treacherous ones
4|106|Seek forgiveness from God. He is All-forgiving and All-merciful
4|107|Do not defend those who deceive themselves; God does not love those who are treacherous and sinful
4|108|They hide their sins from other people but they cannot hide themselves from God who is constantly with them, even when they hold nocturnal meetings, a thing which God does not like. God comprehends all that they do
4|109|You defend them in this life but who will defend them against God on the Day of Judgment and who will be their attorney
4|110|One who commits a sin or does wrong to himself and then seeks forgiveness from God, will find God All-forgiving and All-merciful
4|111|One who commits sins has committed them against his own soul. God is All-knowing and All-wise
4|112|One who makes a mistake or commits a sin and ascribes it to an innocent person, he only burdens himself with slander and a grave sin
4|113|Were it not for the favor and mercy of God, some of them would have certainly tried to make you (Muhammad) go astray. However, they cannot lead any one astray but themselves nor can they harm you. God has revealed the Book to you, has given you wisdom, and has taught you what you did not know. Certainly God's favor to you has been great
4|114|There is nothing good in much of their secret talks except for that which is for charity, justice, or for reconciliation among people to seek thereby the pleasure of God for which We will give a great reward
4|115|Whoever gives the Messenger a hard time, even after having received clear guidance, and follows a path other than that of the believers, will be left alone. We will cast him into hell, a terrible destination
4|116|God will not forgive the sin of considering something equal to Him, but He may forgive the other sins of whomever He wants. One who considers anything equal to God has certainly gone far away from the right path
4|117|They (the pagans) only worship idols and Satan, the persistent rebel
4|118|God condemned Satan when he said, "I will certainly take my revenge from Your servants
4|119|I will lead them astray, induce in their hearts prolonged, worldly desires, command them to pierce the ears of their animals, sacrificed for the idols, and order them to change the religion of God." One who accepts Satan as his guardian, instead of God, has certainly incurred a great loss upon himself
4|120|Satan gives them false promises and tempts them to develop longings which can never be realized
4|121|Such people will dwell in hell fire from which they will not be able to escape
4|122|We will admit the righteously striving believers to Paradise wherein streams flow and they will live therein forever. God's promise is true for no one is more truthful than Him
4|123|Believers and People of the Book, wishes alone can never provide you with salvation. Whoever commits evil will be punished accordingly and no one besides God will be his guardian or helper
4|124|Any believer, male or female, who acts righteously, will enter Paradise and will not suffer the least bit of injustice
4|125|Whose religion is better than that in which one submits himself to God, behaves righteously, and follows the upright religion of Abraham, God's chosen friend
4|126|To God belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth and He has control over all things
4|127|(Muhammad), they ask you concerning women. Tell them, "God will instruct you about them, besides that which can be read in the Book, about widows with children, whom you wanted to marry without giving them their due rights and He will instruct you about the rights of the weak and oppressed children. God commands you to maintain justice with the orphans. God knows all about whatever good you do
4|128|If a woman is afraid of her husband's ill treatment and desertion, it will be no sin for both of them to reach a reconciliation. Reconciliation is good even though men's souls are swayed by greed. If you act righteously and be pious, God is Well Aware of what you do
4|129|You will never be able to maintain justice among your wives and love them all equally, no matter how hard you try. Do not give total preference to one of them, leaving the other as if in suspense. If you do bring about reconciliation and maintain piety, God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
4|130|If the marriage is terminated, God will make each one of them financially independent. God is Munificent and Wise
4|131|To God belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. We have told you and the People of the Book to have fear of God. If you all refuse to believe in Him, know that to God belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. God is Self-sufficient and Praiseworthy
4|132|To God belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. God is a totally Sufficient Guardian
4|133|Had God wanted He could have destroyed you all and replaced you by another people; He has the power to do so
4|134|Be it known to those who want worldly rewards that God holds the rewards for this life as well as the life to come. God is All-hearing and All-seeing
4|135|Believers, be the supporters of justice and the testify to what you may have witnessed, for the sake of God, even against yourselves, parents, and relatives; whether it be against the rich or the poor. God must be given preference over them. Let not your desires cause you to commit injustice. If you deviate from the truth in your testimony, or decline to give your testimony at all, know that God is Well Aware of what you do
4|136|Believers, have faith in God and His Messenger, the Book which is revealed to him, and the Bible which has been revealed before. Whoever refuses to believe in God, His angels, Books, Messengers and the Day of Judgment, has gone far away from the right path
4|137|God will not forgive or guide to the right path those who first believe, then disbelieve, again believe and disbelieve, and then increase their disbelief
4|138|Tell the hypocrites that for them there will be a painful torment
4|139|Do those who establish friendship with the disbelievers instead of the believers seek honor? Let them know that all honor belongs to God
4|140|God has told you (believers) in the Book that when you hear people disbelieving and mocking God's revelations, do not sit with them unless they change the subject. You will become like them. God will gather all the hypocrites and the disbelievers together in hell fire
4|141|(The hypocrites) wait and watch. If God grants you victory, they say, "Did we not help you?" If the unbelievers are victorious, they say, "Did we not encourage you not to surrender to the believers and did we not protect you from them?" God will judge among you on the Day of Judgment. He will never help the disbelievers against the believers
4|142|The hypocrites try to deceive God but He, in fact, deceives them. They stand up in prayer lazily just to show that they pray, but, in truth they remember God very little
4|143|They are hesitant people belonging to neither side. You can find no other way for one whom God has caused to go astray
4|144|Believers, do not make unbelievers your intimate friends and supporters rather than believers. Do you want to establish clear evidence against yourselves before God
4|145|The hypocrites will be placed in the lowest bottom of the fire and none of you will ever find a helper for them, except
4|146|those (hypocrites) who have repented, put their trust in God, and sincerely followed only His religion will live with the believers to whom God will give a great reward
4|147|Why should God punish you if you give thanks and believe in Him? God is All-rewarding and All-forgiving
4|148|God does not love public accusation unless one is truly wronged. God is All-hearing and All-knowing
4|149|Whether you act virtuously, in public or in private, or pardon (people's) faults, God is All-forgiving and All-powerful
4|150|Those who disbelieve in God and His Messengers try to create differences between God and His Messengers (by rejecting their message). They say, "We believe in some but not in others." Thus, they try to find a middle way
4|151|but, in fact, they are unbelievers, and for them We have prepared a humiliating torment
4|152|As for those who believe in God and make no distinction between His Messengers, they will receive His reward. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
4|153|(Muhammad), the People of the Book ask you to make a Book descend to them from the heavens. However, they had asked Moses for things much harder to do than this, by saying, "Show us God in person." Thunder and lightning struck them because of their unjust demands. Despite all the evidence that had come to them, they started to worship the calf, but We forgave them for their sins and gave Moses clear authority
4|154|We raised Mount (Sinai) above them because of Our solemn promise to them. Also, We told them to prostrate themselves when entering the gate (of the holy house) and not to commit transgression on the Sabbath. We made a solemn covenant with them
4|155|However, because of their disbelief, disregard of their covenant, denial of God's revelations, murdering the Prophets without reason, and their saying that their hearts were covered, We sealed up their hearts. Only a few of them believe
4|156|Their hearts were also sealed because of their lack of faith, their gravely slanderous accusation against Mary
4|157|and their statement that they murdered Jesus, son of Mary, the Messenger of God, when, in fact, they could not have murdered him or crucified him. They, in fact, murdered someone else by mistake. Even those who disputed (the question of whether or not Jesus was murdered) did not have a shred of evidence. All that they knew about it was mere conjecture. They certainly could not have murdered Jesus
4|158|God raised him up to Himself. God is Majestic and All-wise
4|159|There will be no one among the People of the Book who will not believe (a belief of no value) in him (Jesus) before their deaths. On the Day of Judgment, (Jesus) will testify against them
4|160|We made unlawful for the Jews certain pure things which had been lawful for them before, because of the injustice which they had committed, their obstructing many people from the way of God
4|161|their taking usury which was prohibited for them, and their consuming people's property unjustly. For the unbelievers among them, We have prepared a painful torment
4|162|However, the learned among them (the Jews) and the faithful believe in what God has revealed to you (Muhammad) and to the others before you and those who are steadfast in prayer, pay their religious tax, and believe in God and the Day of Judgment. They all will receive a great reward from Us
4|163|(Muhammad), We have sent revelations to you just as were sent to Noah and the Prophets who lived after him and to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, his descendants, Jesus, Job, Jonah, Aaron, and Solomon. We gave the Psalms to David
4|164|(We sent revelations to) the Messengers mentioned to you before and also to Messengers who have not been mentioned to you. God spoke to Moses in words
4|165|The Messengers were sent to give people the glad news (of God's mercy) and warn them (of His punishment) so that the human being would not have any objections against God, after the coming of the Messengers, (that they did not have any knowledge of His mercy and punishment). God is Majestic and All-wise
4|166|God testifies that whatever He has revealed to you (Muhammad) He has revealed it on purpose and the angels also testify to it but God's testimony alone is Sufficient
4|167|Those who have rejected the faith and have obstructed people from the way of God, have certainly gone far away from the right path
4|168|God will not forgive those who have rejected the faith and committed injustice, nor will He guide them to any way
4|169|other than that of hell wherein they will live forever. For God this is not in the least bit difficult
4|170|Mankind, the Messenger has come to you from your Lord in all Truth. It is for your own good to believe in him, but if you disbelieve, know that to God belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. God is All-knowing and All-wise
4|171|People of the Book, do not exceed the limits of devotion in your religion or say anything about God which is not the Truth. Jesus, son of Mary, is only a Messenger of God, His Word, and a spirit from Him whom He conveyed to Mary. So have faith in God and His Messengers. Do not say that there are three gods. It is better for you to stop believing in the Trinity. There is only One God. He is too glorious to give birth to a son. To God belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. God alone is a Sufficient Guardian for all
4|172|Jesus never disdained the worship of God nor did the nearest angels to God. Whoever, out of pride, disdains the worship of God should know that everyone will be brought before Him
4|173|The righteously striving believers will receive the reward for their deeds and extra favors from God. But those who disdain the worship of God out of pride will suffer the most painful torment. They will find no guardian or helper besides God
4|174|Mankind, an undeniable proof has certainly come to you and We have sent you a shining light
4|175|Those who believe in God and seek His protection will receive His mercy, favors, and His guidance to the right path
4|176|(Muhammad), they seek your verdict. Tell them, "God commands this concerning your kindred: If a man dies childless but has a sister, she will receive half of the legacy. If a woman dies childless, her brother will receive the whole legacy. If a childless man leaves only two sisters, both will receive two-thirds of the legacy. If the heirs are both sisters and brothers, the share of a male will be twice as much as the share of the female. God explains His Laws to you so that you will not go astray. God knows all things
5|1|Believers, stand by your contracts (and obligations). Of all animals, cattle has been made lawful for you as food with certain exceptions. Hunting is not lawful for you during ihram (a part of the rituals during pilgrimage). God decrees as He wills
5|2|Believers, do not disrespect the reminders of God, the sacred months, the animals brought for sacrifice, or what is marked for sacrificial offering or the people heading to the precinct of the Sacred House to seek the favor and pleasure of their Lord. Once the restrictions of ihram are over, you may hunt. Do not let the hostility of a group of people keep you away from the Sacred Mosque or make you express animosity. Co-operate with each other in righteousness and piety, not in sin and hostility. Have fear of God; He is stern in His retribution
5|3|It is unlawful for you to consume the following as food: an animal that has not been properly slaughtered, blood, pork, an animal slaughtered and consecrated in the name of someone other than God, an animal killed by strangulation or a violent blow, an animal killed by falling down, an animal which has been gored to death, an animal partly eaten by a wild beast before being properly slaughtered, an animal which has been sacrificed on the stone blocks (which pagans worshipped), and any flesh divided by casting superstitious and gambling arrows (a pagan tradition), which is a sin. Today, the unbelievers have lost hope about your religion. Do not be afraid of them but have fear of Me. On this day I have perfected your religion, completed My favors to you, and have chosen Islam as your religion. If anyone not (normally) inclined to sin is forced by hunger to eat unlawful substances instead of proper food, he may do so to spare his life. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
5|4|(Muhammad), they ask you what has been made lawful for them (as food). Tell them, "All pure things are made lawful for you." If you train dogs or other beasts for hunting, you should train them according to what God has taught you. It, then, is lawful for you to eat the animals that they hunt, provided you mention the Name of God over the prey. Have fear of God. Certainly God's reckoning is swift
5|5|On this day, all pure things are made lawful for you (as food). The food of the People of the Book is made lawful for you and your food is made lawful for them. It is lawful for you to marry chaste Muslim women and chaste women of the People of the Book, provided, you pay their dowry, maintain chastity, and avoid fornication or lustful relations outside of marriage. The deeds of anyone who rejects the faith, certainly, become fruitless. He will be of those who lose on the Day of Judgment
5|6|Believers, when you are about to pray, wash your face and your hands along with the elbows and wipe your head and your feet to the ankles. If you experience a seminal discharge, manage to take (the required) bath. If you are sick, or on a journey, or have just defecated, or have had intercourse with women and cannot find any water, perform a tayammum by: touching clean natural earth with both palms and wiping (the upper part) of your face and (the back of) your hands. God does not want you to suffer hardship. He wants you to be purified. He wants to complete His favors to you so that perhaps you would give Him thanks
5|7|Remember God's favors to you and the firm covenant that He has made with you. You said because of this covenant, "We have heard (the words of the Lord) and have obeyed Him." Have fear of God; He knows well all that the hearts contain
5|8|Believers, be steadfast for the cause of God and just in bearing witness. Let not a group's hostility to you cause you to deviate from justice. Be just, for it is closer to piety. Have fear of God; God is Well Aware of what you do
5|9|God has promised forgiveness and a great reward to the righteously striving believers
5|10|However, the unbelievers who have called Our revelations lies will have hell for their dwelling
5|11|Believers, recall God's favors to you when a group of people were about to harm you and God made their evil plots against you fail. Have fear of God. Believers, only trust in God
5|12|God certainly made a solemn covenant with the children of Israel and raised among them twelve elders. God said to them, "I am with you if you will be steadfast in your prayers, pay (zakat) religious tax, believe in My Messengers, support them with reverence, and give a generous loan for the cause of God." We shall expiate your bad deeds and admit you to the gardens wherein streams flow. Whichever of you turns to disbelief after this has certainly gone astray (from the right path)
5|13|For their disregard of their solemn covenant with God, We condemned the Israelites and made their hearts hard as stone. Now they displace the words of God and have forgotten their share of the guidance that they had received. Still you receive news of the treachery of all but a few of them. Forgive and ignore them. God loves the righteous ones
5|14|We had made a solemn covenant with those who call themselves Christians, but they forgot their share of the guidance that was sent to them. We have induced hatred and animosity among them which will remain with them until the Day of Judgment when God will tell them about what they had done
5|15|People of the Book, Our Messenger has come to you. He tells you about the many things that you had been hiding of the Book and forgives you much. A light and a clarifying Book has come to you from God
5|16|to show the way of peace to those who seek His pleasure, to bring them out of darkness into light through His will and to guide them to the right path
5|17|Those who have said that the Messiah, son of Mary, is God, have, in fact, committed themselves to disbelief. (Muhammad), ask them, "Who can prevent God from destroying the Messiah, his mother and all that is in the earth?" To God belongs all that is in the heavens, the earth, and all that is between them. God creates whatever He wants and He has power over all things
5|18|The Jews and Christians call themselves the beloved sons of God. (Muhammad), ask them, "Why does God punish you for your sins? In fact, you are mere human beings whom He has created. He forgives and punishes whomever He wants. To Him belongs all that is in the heavens, the earth, and all that is between them and to Him do all things return
5|19|People of the Book, Our Messenger has come to you to guide you at a time when none of Our other Messengers are living among you. (We sent him) so that you will not complain about having no one to tell you of what is good or warn you of what is bad. Now a bearer of good news has come to you. God has power over all things
5|20|When Moses told his people, "Recall God's favors to you. He made Messengers and Kings out of your own people and gave you what He had not given to others
5|21|Enter the sacred promised land which God has designated for you. Do not return to disbelief lest you become lost
5|22|They said, "Moses, a giant race of people is living there. We shall never go there unless they leave the land first. If they leave it then we will enter
5|23|Two God-fearing men on whom God had bestowed favors told them, "Proceed through the gates and when you enter the city you will be victorious. Have trust in God if you are true believers
5|24|They said, "(Moses), as long as they are in the land, we shall never go there. Go with your Lord to fight them but we shall stay where we are
5|25|(Moses) said, "Lord, I can only speak for myself and my brother; keep us away from the evil-doers
5|26|The Lord said, "The land will be prohibited to them for forty years (during all such time) they will wander in the land. Do not feel sad for the evil-doing people
5|27|(Muhammad) tell them the true story of the two sons of Adam (Abel and Cain). Each one of them offered a sacrifice. God accepted the sacrifice of one of them (Abel) but not that of the other (Cain) who then said to his brother, "I shall certainly kill you." (Abel) replied, "God only accepts the offerings of the pious ones
5|28|Even if you try to kill me, I certainly shall not try to kill you. I have fear of God, the Lord of the creation
5|29|I would prefer you to take sole responsibility for both our sins and thus become a dweller of hell; this is what an unjust person deserves
5|30|(Cain's) soul prompted him to kill his own brother. In doing so he became of those who lose
5|31|God sent down a raven which started to dig up the earth to show the killer how to bury the corpse of his brother. On seeing the raven, (Cain) said, "Woe to me! Am I less able than a raven to bury the corpse of my brother?" He became greatly remorseful
5|32|For this reason, We made it a law for the children of Israel that the killing of a person for reasons other than legal retaliation or for stopping corruption in the land is as great a sin as murdering all of mankind. However, to save a life would be as great a virtue as to save all of mankind. Our Messengers had come to them with clear authoritative evidence but many of them (Israelites) thereafter started doing wrong in the land
5|33|The only proper recompense for those who fight against God and His Messenger and try to spread evil in the land is to be killed, crucified, or either to have one of their hands and feet cut from the opposite side or to be sent into exile. These are to disgrace them in this life and they will suffer a great torment in the life hereafter
5|34|As for those who repent before you (the legal authorities) have control over them (by proving their guilts). They should know that God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
5|35|Believers, have fear of God. Find the means to reach Him and strive hard for His cause so that you may have everlasting happiness
5|36|Had the unbelievers had twice as much as the wealth of the whole earth in order to ransom themselves from the torment in the life hereafter, still their ransom would not have been accepted. For them there will be a painful torment
5|37|They will wish to get out of the fire but they will not have such a choice. Their torment will be constant
5|38|Cut off the hands of a male or female thief as a punishment for their deed and a lesson for them from God. God is Majestic and All-wise
5|39|However, God will accept the repentance of whoever repents and reforms himself after committing injustice; He is All-forgiving and All-merciful
5|40|Do you not know that to God belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth and that He punishes or forgives whomever He wants? God has power over all things
5|41|Messenger, do not be grieved about the people who run back to disbelief. They only say that they believe but, in fact, they have no faith in their hearts. Some Jews knowingly listen to lies and accept the lies which come from others, (Jews), who have no relation with you and who distort certain words of the Bible and say to the people, "Accept only those words which are the same as what We have told you. If you do not, then beware!" You can not help those whom God wants to try. God does not want to cleanse the hearts of such people. They lead a disgraceful life in this world and in the life hereafter they will suffer a great torment
5|42|They deliberately listen to lies (for deceitful purposes) and live on usury. If they come to you (seeking your judgment to settle their differences), you may settle their disputes or keep aloof from them. Should you choose not to bother with them, it will not harm you in the least. If you decide to issue your decree, decide their case with justice. God loves those who are just
5|43|How can they come to you for judgment when they already have the Torah which contains the decree of God! It does not take them long to disregard your judgment; they are not true believers
5|44|We had revealed the Torah, containing guidance and light. The Prophets who had submitted themselves to the will of God, judged the Jews by the laws of the Torah. So did the godly people and the Jewish scholars who remembered some parts of the Book of God and bore witness to it. Mankind, do not be afraid of people but have fear of Me. Do not sell My revelations for a paltry price. Those who do not judge by the laws of God are disbelievers
5|45|In the Torah We made mandatory for the Jews these rules of retaliation: Capital punishment for the murder of a person; an eye for an eye, a nose for a nose, an ear for an ear, a tooth for a tooth, and a just compensation for a wound. If the perpetrator is forgiven by the affected party, this will be an expiation of his crime. Those who do not judge according to what God has revealed are unjust
5|46|We made Jesus, son of Mary, follow in the footsteps (of the earlier Prophets) and confirm what existed in the Torah in his time. We gave him the Gospel containing guidance and light, as a confirmation of the Torah and instruction and advice for the pious ones
5|47|The followers of the Gospels (the New Testament) must judge according to what God has revealed in it. Those who do not judge by the laws of God are evil doers
5|48|We have revealed the Book to you (Muhammad) in all Truth. It confirms the (original) Bible and has the authority to preserve or abrogate what the Bible contains. Judge among them by what God has revealed to you and do not follow their desires instead of the Truth which has come to you. We have given a law and a way of life to each of you. Had God wanted, He could have made you into one nation, but He wanted to see who are the more pious ones among you. Compete with each other in righteousness. All of you will return to God who will tell you the truth in the matter of your differences
5|49|(Muhammad), you must judge among them by what God has revealed. Do not follow their desires. Beware of their mischievous deception concerning some of the matters that God has revealed to you. If they turn away, know that what God wants is to punish them for some of their sins. Many human beings are evil-doers
5|50|Do they want judgments that are issued out of ignorance? Who is a better judge for the people whose belief is based on certainty, than God
5|51|Believers, do not consider the Jews and Christians as your intimate friends for they are only friends with each other. Whoever does so will be considered as one of them. God does not guide the unjust people
5|52|(Muhammad), you have seen those whose hearts are sick, running around among the people (Jews) saying, "We are afraid of being struck by disaster." But if God were to grant you victory or some other favors, they would then regret for what they had been hiding in their souls
5|53|The believers say, "Are these the people who proclaimed themselves to be our sworn friends?" Their deeds have become devoid of all virtue and they themselves have become lost
5|54|Believers, whichever of you turns away from his faith should know that God will soon raise a people whom He loves and who love Him, who are humble towards the believers, dignified to the unbelievers, who strive hard for the cause of God, and who have no fear of anyone's accusations. This is a favor from God. He bestows His favors upon whomever He wants. God is Munificent and All-knowing
5|55|Only God, His Messenger, and the true believers who are steadfast in prayer and pay alms, while they kneel during prayer, are your guardians
5|56|One whose guardians are God, His Messenger, and the true believers should know that God's party will certainly triumph
5|57|Believers, do not consider those among the People of the Book and the unbelievers who mock at your religion and treat it as useless, as your protectors. Have fear of God if you are true believers
5|58|Because they are devoid of understanding, they ridicule your call for prayers saying that it is a useless act
5|59|(Muhammad), say to the People of the Book, "Do you take revenge on us because of our belief in God and what He has revealed to us and to others before us? Most of you are evil-doers
5|60|Say, "Should I tell you who will receive the worst punishment from God? Those whom God has condemned, afflicted with His anger, made apes out of them, swine and worshippers of Satan, will have the worst dwelling and will wander far away from the right path
5|61|When they come to you (believers), they say, "We have accepted your faith." However, they entered into your faith as unbelievers and left it as unbelievers. God knows best what they were hiding
5|62|You can see many of them competing with each other in sin, hostility, and in taking usury. What they had been doing is certainly evil
5|63|Why did the men of God and rabbis not forbid them from following their sinful words and their consuming of unlawful gains. Evil was their (rabbis and priests) profession
5|64|The Jews have said, "God's hands are bound." May they themselves be handcuffed and condemned for what they have said! God's hands are free and He distributes His favors to His creatures however He wants. The rebellion and disbelief of many of them will be intensified against you because of what has been revealed to you from your Lord. We have induced hostility and hatred among them which will remain with them up until the Day of Judgment. Whenever they kindle the fire of war, God extinguishes it. They try to destroy the land but God does not love the evil-doers
5|65|Had the People of the Book accepted the faith and observed piety, certainly, We would have redeemed their bad deeds and admitted them into a blissful Paradise
5|66|Had they followed the Laws of the Old and New Testaments and what was revealed to them from their Lord, they would have received Our bounties from above and below in abundance. Some of them are modest people, but many of them commit the worst sins
5|67|Messenger, preach what is revealed to you from your Lord. If you will not preach, it would be as though you have not conveyed My message. God protects you from men. He does not guide the unbelieving people
5|68|(Muhammad), tell the People of the Book, "You have nothing unless you follow the Old and New Testaments and that which (the Quran) God has revealed to you." Whatever has been revealed to you (Muhammad) from your Lord will only increase their disbelief and rebellion (against you). Do not grieve for the unbelieving people
5|69|The believers, Jews, Sabaeans, and the Christians who believe in God and the Day of Judgment and who do what is right will have nothing to fear nor will they be grieved
5|70|We made a covenant with the Israelites and sent Messengers to them. Whenever a Messenger came to them with a message which did not suit their desires, they would reject some of the Messengers and kill others
5|71|They were blind and deaf in their pride, thinking themselves (to be the chosen nation of God) and thus safe from calamities. God forgave them but many of them out, of pride, again became blind and deaf. God is Well Aware of what they do
5|72|Those who say that Jesus, the son of Mary, is God, have, in fact, turned to disbelief. Jesus said to the Israelites, "Worship God, my Lord and yours. God will deprive anyone who considers anything equal to God of Paradise and his dwelling will be fire. The unjust people have no helpers
5|73|Those who say that God is the third of the Three, have, in fact, turned to disbelief. There is no Lord but God, the only One Lord. If they will not give-up such belief, the disbelievers among them will suffer a painful torment
5|74|Should they not repent and ask Him for forgiveness? God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
5|75|Jesus, the son of Mary, was no more than a Messenger before whom there lived many other Messengers. His mother was a truthful woman and both of them ate earthly food. Consider how We explain the evidence (of the Truth) to them and see where they then turn
5|76|(Muhammad), say to them, "Do you worship things besides God which can neither harm or benefit you?" It is only God who is All-hearing and All-knowing
5|77|Say to the People of the Book, "Do not wrongly exceed the proper limit of devotion to your religion or follow the desires of the people who have erred. They have misled many others and have themselves stayed far away from the right path
5|78|The unbelievers among the Israelites, because of their disobedience and transgression, were condemned by David and Jesus, the son of Mary for their disobedience; they were transgressors
5|79|They did not prevent each other from committing sins nor would they themselves stay away from them. Evil was what they had done
5|80|You have seen many of them establishing friendship with the unbelievers. Vile is what their souls have gained! They have invoked the wrath of God upon themselves and they will live forever in torment
5|81|Had they had faith in God, the Prophet, and what was revealed to him, they would not have been the friends of the unbelievers. However, many of them are evil-doers
5|82|You find Jews and pagans among the worst of the enemies of the believers. (Of the non-believers) nearest to them (the believers) in affection you find those who say, "We are Christians," for among them are the priests and monks who are not proud
5|83|When they hear what is revealed to the Messenger, you can see their eyes flood with tears, as they learn about the Truth. They say, "Lord, we believe (in this faith). Write our names down as bearing witness to it
5|84|Why should we not believe in God and the Truth that has come to us and hope that the Lord will admit us into the company of the righteous people
5|85|Thus, God has given them as their reward, gardens wherein streams flow and wherein they will live forever. Such will be the recompense of the righteous people
5|86|Those who disbelieved and denied Our revelations will be the dwellers of Hell
5|87|Believers, do not make unlawful the pure things which God has made lawful for you. Do not transgress for God does not love the transgressors
5|88|Eat from the pure and lawful things that God has given to you. Have fear of God in Whom you believe
5|89|God will not hold you responsible for your thoughtless oaths. However, He will question you about your deliberate oaths. The expiation for breaking an oath is to feed ten needy people with food, typical of that which you feed to your own people, to clothe them or to set a slave free. One who cannot pay this, he must fast for three days to expiate his oaths. Keep your oaths. Thus, does God explain His Laws so that you will give Him thanks
5|90|Believers, wine, gambling, the stone altars and arrows (that the pagans associate with certain divine characters) are all abominable acts associated with satanic activities. Avoid them so that you may have everlasting happiness
5|91|Satan wants to induce hostility and hatred among you through wine and gambling and to prevent you from remembering God and prayer. Will you then avoid such things
5|92|Obey God and the Messenger and be cautious (of the harmful things). If you turn away (from Our laws), know that the duty of the Messenger is only to preach in clear words
5|93|The righteously striving believers will not be blamed for what they have eaten, if they maintain piety, do good deeds, have faith, and be charitable. God loves the generous people
5|94|Believers, God will test you (to see the strength of your obedience) concerning what you hunt by hand or spear, so that He would know who has fear of Him in private. Whoever transgresses will suffer a painful torment
5|95|Believers, do not hunt when you are in the holy precinct. Whichever of you purposely kills game in the holy precinct has to offer, as an expiation, a sacrifice in the holy precinct which two just people among you would consider equal to the prey or food to a destitute person or has to fast (for an appointed time) to bear the burden of the penalty for his deed. God forgives whatever was done in the past, but He will take revenge on whoever returns to transgression, for He is Majestic and Capable of taking revenge
5|96|It is lawful for you to hunt from the sea and to eat seafood. This is for your benefit and for the benefit of travellers. However, it is not lawful for you to hunt on land as long as you are in the sacred precinct. Have fear of God before whom you will all be raised
5|97|God has made the Kabah, the Sacred House, the sacred months, the unmarked and marked sacrificial animals for the welfare of men and in order to inform you that God knows all that is in the heavens and the earth. He has the knowledge of all things
5|98|Know that God is stern in His retribution and He is All-forgiving and All-merciful
5|99|The duty of the Messenger is only to preach. God knows what you reveal or hide
5|100|(Muhammad), say to them, "The pure and filthy are not the same even though the abundance of filth may attract you. Men of reason, have fear of God so that you may have eternal happiness
5|101|Believers, do not ask about things which, if revealed to you, would disappoint you. If you ask about such things when the Prophet is receiving revelations, they will also be revealed to you. God has exempted you (from the responsibilities of the things you wanted to know). He is All-forgiving and Forbearing
5|102|People living before you had asked about such things, but then rejected them
5|103|God has not instituted the rites of Bahirah, Sa'ibah, Wasilah, nor of Hami (names of certain animals that the pagans would offer as sacrifice). It is the pagans who have attributed falsehood to God. Many of them have no understanding
5|104|When they are told to refer to the guidance of God and to the Messenger, they say, "The tradition of our fathers is sufficient for our guidance," even though, in fact, their fathers had neither knowledge nor proper guidance
5|105|Believers, save your own souls, for if you have the right guidance, no one who strays can harm you. You will all return to God who will tell you about what you have done
5|106|Believers, when death approaches any one of you, let two just men from your own people (Muslims) or any two other men (People of the Book) if death befalls you on a journey, bear witness to the bequest. If you have any doubts as to their honesty, detain them and let them take an oath after the prayer, each one of them saying, "I swear by God that my testimony is true. I am not selling the Truth for a paltry price even though the beneficiary would be one of my relatives. I do not hide the testimony which is the right of God, for then I would be one of the sinners
5|107|If their honesty is challenged, two others from the relatives of the deceased should swear in the same way and testify to the bequest saying, "We swear by God that our testimony is the true one. We do not transgress in the matter lest we become unjust ones
5|108|This will help preserve a proper testimony because the witness will be afraid of the denial of their own testimony by a second pair of witness. Have fear of God and listen (properly). God does not guide the evil doing people
5|109|Have fear of the day when God will bring all the Messengers together and ask them, "What was the response of men to your call?" They will reply, "We have no knowledge. You are the only One who has knowledge of the unseen
5|110|When God said, "Jesus, son of Mary, recall My favors to you and your mother. (Recall) how I supported you by the holy spirit, made you speak to people from your cradle and when you grew up, taught you the Book, gave you wisdom, the Torah, and the Gospel. (Recall) when, by My will, you made a sculpture of a bird out of clay, blew into it, and it turned into a real bird by My Will. (Recall) how, by My will, you healed the deaf, the lepers, and raised the dead. (Recall) when you came to the Israelites in the house with clear miracles and I saved you from their mischief, even though the disbelievers among them said, "This is obviously magic
5|111|(Recall) when I inspired the disciples to have faith in Me and My Messenger. They said, "We have accepted the faith. Lord, bear witness that we have submitted ourselves to Your will
5|112|(Recall) when the disciples said, "Jesus, son of Mary, can your Lord send us a table full of food from heaven?" and you replied, "Have fear of God if you are true believers
5|113|They said, "We only wish to eat therefrom to comfort our hearts, to know that you have spoken the Truth to us, and to bear witness to it along with the others
5|114|When Jesus prayed, "Lord, send us a table full of food from heaven so that it will make a feast for us and for those who are yet to come in this world and an evidence from You. Give us sustenance, for You are the best Provider
5|115|God replied, "I am sending it to you, but if anyone of you turns back to disbelief, I will make him suffer a torment that no one has ever suffered
5|116|When God asked Jesus, son of Mary "Did you tell men to consider you and your mother as their gods besides God?" he replied, "Glory be to you! How could I say what I have no right to say? Had I ever said it, You would have certainly known about it. You know what is in my soul, but I do not know what is in Yours. It is You who has absolute knowledge of the unseen
5|117|I did not tell them anything except what You commanded me to tell them. I told them that they must worship God who is everyone's Lord. I watched them as long as I was among them until You raised me to Yourself and You Yourself had also watched over them; You are Omnipresent
5|118|You may punish Your servants or forgive them for You are Majestic and Wise
5|119|God will say, "This is the Day when the truthful ones will benefit from their truthfulness. For them there are gardens wherein streams flow and they will live therein forever. God is pleased with them and they will be pleased with God in their supreme triumph
5|120|To God belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them and He has power over all things
6|1|Only God Who has created the heavens, the earth, darkness, and light deserves all praise. The disbelievers consider other things equal to Him
6|2|It is He who has created you from clay to live for a life-time and the span of your life is only known to Him. You are still suspicious
6|3|He is God of the heavens and the earth and He knows whatever you conceal, reveal, or gain
6|4|(The unbelievers) have always turned away from the revelations and the evidence (of the Truth) that has been sent to them from time to time
6|5|They have refused the Truth (Muhammad's message) that has come to them but they will soon learn the consequences of their mocking
6|6|Why do they not consider how many generations living before them We have destroyed. We established those nations in the land with abilities far beyond those given to you. We sent down plenty of rain from the sky for them and made streams flow therein, but, then, We destroyed them for their sins and established other nations after them
6|7|(Muhammad), had We sent you a Book on paper, the unbelievers would have touched it with their hands but would still have said, "It is no more than plain sorcery
6|8|They have said, "Why has not an angel come to him (Muhammad)?" Had We sent an angel to them, the matter would have inevitably been out of their hands, and they would have been given no more time
6|9|Were We to have made him (Our Messenger) an angel, We would have made him resemble a human being and they would have again complained that the matter was as confusing to them as it is to them now
6|10|They mocked the Messengers who lived before you (Muhammad), but those who received warnings of punishment and mocked the warnings, all suffered their torments accordingly
6|11|(Muhammad), tell them to travel in the land and see what happened to those who rejected the Truth
6|12|Ask them, "Who is the owner of the heavens and the earth besides God, the All-merciful, who will gather you all together on the Day of Judgment? That day will certainly come. Those who have lost their souls will not believe
6|13|To Him belongs all that rests during the night and the day. He is All-hearing and All-knowing
6|14|(Muhammad), ask them, "Should I take a guardian other than God, the Originator of the heavens and the earth, who feeds everyone and who needs no food Himself?" Say, "I have been commanded to be the first Muslim (submitted to the will of God). Thus, people, do not be pagans
6|15|(Muhammad), say, "Because of the torment of the Great Day, I am afraid to disobey my Lord
6|16|One who will be saved from the torment on the Day of Judgment will certainly have received God's mercy and this will be a manifest triumph
6|17|(Muhammad), if God afflicts you with hardship, no one besides Him will be able to relieve you. If He bestows a favor on you, know that He has power over all things
6|18|He is Wise, Well Aware and Dominant over all His creatures
6|19|(Muhammad), ask them, "What is the greatest testimony? God testifies of my truthfulness to you. He has revealed this Quran to me to warn you and the coming generations (against disobeying God). Do you believe that other gods exist besides God? I solemnly declare that He is the only Lord and that I am not guilty of believing in what the pagans believe
6|20|The People of the Book know him (Muhammad) just as well as they know their own children, but those who have lost their souls will not believe
6|21|Who are more unjust than those who ascribe falsehood to God or reject His revelations? The unjust will certainly have no happiness
6|22|On the Day of Judgment when We will gather all people together, We will ask the pagans, "Where are those whom you believed to be your gods
6|23|Attempting to answer, they will say, "Lord, we swear by Your Name that we were not pagans
6|24|Consider, how they have lied against their own souls and have lost their gods
6|25|Some of them listen to you, but We have veiled their hearts so that they cannot understand and made them deaf. They disbelieve all the evidence (of Our existence) that they may have seen. They only come to you for the sake of argument and the disbelievers say that (whatever Muhammad says) is no more than ancient legends
6|26|They keep away from the faith and forbid others to accept it. They destroy no one except themselves, yet they do not realize it
6|27|If only you could see them standing in the fire saying, "Would that we could return to the worldly life. We would never reject any of our Lord's revelations and we would be true believers
6|28|Whatever they had concealed will be revealed to them. If they were to return to (the worldly life), they would again worship idols, for they are liars
6|29|They have said that this life is the only life and that there will be no Resurrection
6|30|Would that you could see them standing before their Lord who would ask them, "Is not the Resurrection true?" They would reply, "Yes, Lord, there is a Resurrection." The Lord would then say, "For your disbelief, suffer the torment
6|31|Those who do not believe in the Day of Judgment have incurred upon themselves a great loss. When the Day of Judgment suddenly comes upon them, they will sink under the burden of their sins in grief for their neglecting that day. Terrible indeed will be their burden
6|32|The worldly life is but useless amusement and sport (compared to) the life hereafter which is far better and is only for the pious. Will you not then understand
6|33|We certainly know that you (Muhammad) are sad about what they (the unbelievers) say. It is not you (alone) who has been accused of lying. The unjust have always rejected God's revelations
6|34|The Messengers who lived before you were also accused of lying, but they exercised patience. They were cruelly persecuted before We gave them victory. No one can change the words of God. You have already received news about the Messengers
6|35|(Muhammad), if their refusal of the faith is so grievous to you and if you can dig up the earth or ascend into the sky in search of further evidence to inevitably make them believe you, you should have done so, but note that had God wanted, He could have made them all follow the same guidance. Do not ever be unaware (of this fact)
6|36|Only those who have understanding will accept your faith. (Those who have no understanding) are like the dead whom God will resurrect and to Him will all return
6|37|They say, "Why have not some miracles been given to him, (Muhammad), from his Lord." Tell them, (Muhammad), "God certainly has the Power to show such miracles but many of them are ignorant
6|38|All the beasts on land and flying birds have different communities, just as you (people) do. Nothing is left without a mention in the Book. They will all be brought into the presence of their Lord
6|39|Those who disbelieve Our revelations are, in fact, deaf and dumb. They wander in darkness. God leads astray or guides to the right path whomever He wants
6|40|(Muhammad), say to them, "Should God afflict you with torment, or should the Day of Judgment arrive, if what you claim is true, could you then seek help from any one other than God
6|41|You will certainly ask Him for help. He will save you from hardship if He decides to do so and you will forget all about your gods
6|42|We had sent (Our guidance) to the nations who lived before you and afflicted them with distress and adversity so that they might submit themselves (to God)
6|43|Why did they not submit themselves (to God) when Our torment struck them. Instead, their hearts were hardened and Satan made their evil deeds seem attractive to them
6|44|When they forgot (all) the advice that they had received, We granted them all means of happiness but they were left in despair when We suddenly took Our bounties back from them
6|45|Thus, the transgressing people were destroyed. It is only God, the Lord of creation who deserves all praise
6|46|(Muhammad), ask them, "Have you ever considered that if God was to disable your hearing and vision and veil your hearts, could anyone besides Him restore them?" Look at how plainly We show them the evidence (of the Truth) but they always ignore it
6|47|Tell them, "Have you considered that if God's torment was to befall you suddenly or in public, would anyone else be destroyed except the unjust
6|48|We did not send the Messengers for any other reason than to bring (people) the glad news (of God's mercy) and to warn (them of the torment brought on by disobedience to God). Whoever accepts the faith and lives a righteous life will have nothing to fear, nor will he be grieved
6|49|Those who reject Our revelations will certainly be punished for their evil deeds
6|50|(Muhammad), tell them, "I do not claim to have all the treasures of God in my hands, nor to know the unseen, nor do I claim to be an angel. I follow only what is revealed to me (from God)." Say to them, "Are the blind and the seeing equal?" Why then do you not think
6|51|Preach the Quran to those who are concerned about the Day of Judgment at which time they will be brought before their Lord. Tell them that their only guardian and intercessor is God so that they may become pious
6|52|Do not disregard those who pray to their Lord in the mornings and evenings, seeking their Lord's pleasure. You will not be held responsible for them nor will they be held responsible for you. Do not disregard them lest you become unjust
6|53|We test some of them by the conditions of the others so that the rich and proud ones (seeing your poor and humble followers) would say, "Are these the ones from among all of us whom God has chosen to favor?" Does not God know those who give thanks (much better than others do)
6|54|When the faithful come to you, say to them, "Peace be upon you. Your Lord has decreed for Himself to be All-merciful. Anyone of you who commits a sin out of ignorance, then repents, and reforms himself will find that God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
6|55|Thus do We explain Our revelations so that the sinful way can be plainly discerned
6|56|(Muhammad), tell them, "I am commanded not to worship the idols instead of God. I do not follow your desires lest I go astray and miss the true guidance
6|57|Say, "I have received enough authoritative evidence from my Lord but you have rejected it. Whatever (torment that God has threatened you with for your disbelief) and that which you insist on to experience without delay, is not in my hands. The (final) Judgment is in the hands of God. He reveals the Truth and He is the best Judge
6|58|Say, "If I had in my hands what you demand to experience without delay, the matter would have been ended all together. God knows best about the unjust
6|59|He has with Him the keys to the unseen which no one knows besides Him. He knows all that is in the land and the sea. Not a single leaf falls which He would not know. No single seed exists even in the darkest places of the land, nor anything in the world either wet or dry, that is not kept recorded in the self-evident Book (the tablet preserved in the heavens)
6|60|It is He who keeps you alive in your sleep at night and knows all that you do during the day. He wakes you up from your sleep to complete your worldly life, after which you will all return to Him. He will let you know all about what you had done in your worldly life
6|61|He is Dominant over all His creatures and He sends guards to watch over you until death approaches you. Then His angelic Messengers will, without fail, take away your souls
6|62|(After death) you will all be returned to God, your true Guardian. Know that judgment will be in His Hands and that His reckoning is swift
6|63|(Muhammad), ask them, "Who would save you from the darkness of the land and sea if you were to pray humbly and secretly saying, 'Would that we were saved from this, for we would certainly then give thanks
6|64|Say, "It is God who always saves you from (such hardship) and from all kinds of distress. Even then, you consider idols equal to God
6|65|Say, "God has the power to send torment on you from above or below your feet, or to divide you into different groups quite hostile to one another, and make you suffer from each other's animosity." Consider how plainly We show them a variety of evidence (of the Truth) so that they may have understanding
6|66|(Some of) your people have rejected the Quran, although it is the Truth. Tell them that you are not their guardian
6|67|and that for every prophecy (about you which comes from God) there is an appointed time (to come true) and that they will soon experience it
6|68|When you see people mocking Our revelations, turn away from them so that they may change the subject. If Satan causes you to forget this, do not sit with the unjust people when you remember
6|69|But those who observe piety (commit no sin) by sitting with the (unbelievers) in order to preach (the Truth) so that they, too, may become pious
6|70|(Muhammad), leave alone those to whom their religion is no more than a useless plaything and who are deceived by the lure of the worldly life. Remind them of Our revelation so that a soul will not bring about its own destruction because of its deeds. No one besides God will be its guardian or intercessor, nor will any kind of ransom be accepted from it. Those who have entangled themselves in their evil deeds will drink boiling water and live in painful torment for their hiding the Truth
6|71|Say to them, "Should we, instead of asking for God's help, seek help from that which can neither benefit nor harm us, but would only turn us back to disbelief after God had granted us guidance? To do so would be to act like (those who have been) seduced by Satan, leaving them wandering aimlessly here and there, even though their friends call them, 'Come to the right guidance that has come to us.' " Say, "God's guidance is the only true guidance and we are commanded to submit ourselves to the Lord of the Universe
6|72|Be steadfast in prayer and have fear of God; before Him alone you will all be brought together
6|73|It is He Who has created the heavens and the earth for a genuine purpose. When He commands the Day of Judgment to take place, it will come into existence. His Word is the Truth. The kingdom will be His alone on the day when the trumpet will be sounded. He has all knowledge of the unseen as well as the seen. He is All-wise and All-aware
6|74|Consider when Abraham asked his father, Azar, "Why do you believe idols to be your gods? I find you and your people in absolute error
6|75|Also, We showed (Abraham) the kingdom of the heavens and the earth to strengthen his faith
6|76|When it became dark at night, he (Abraham) saw a star and said, "This is my lord." But when it disappeared, he said, "I do not love those who fade away
6|77|When Abraham saw the rising moon, he said, "This is my lord." But when it faded away, he said, "If my Lord does not guide me I shall certainly go astray
6|78|When he saw the rising sun, he said, "This is my Lord for it is greater (than the others)." But when this too faded away, (Abraham) said, "My people, I disavow whatever you consider equal to God
6|79|I have up-rightly submitted myself to the One who has created the heavens and the earth and I am not an idol worshipper
6|80|In an argument with his people, (Abraham) asked them, "Why do you argue with me about God who has given me guidance? Your idols can do no harm to me unless God wills. God knows all things. Why, then, do you not consider this
6|81|Why should I be afraid of your idols when you are not afraid of worshipping them without any authority from heaven? Would that you knew which of us is more deserving to receive amnesty
6|82|Those who have accepted the faith and have kept it pure from injustice, have achieved security and guidance
6|83|Such was the authoritative reasoning that We gave Abraham over his people. We raise whomever We want to a higher rank. Your Lord is All-wise and All-knowing
6|84|We gave (Abraham) Isaac and Jacob. Both had received Our guidance. Noah received Our guidance before Abraham and so did his descendants: David, Solomon, Job, Joseph, Moses, and Aaron. Thus is the reward for the righteous people
6|85|We also gave guidance to Zacharias, John, Jesus, and Elias, who were all pious people
6|86|and Ishmael, Elisha, Jonah, and Lot whom We exalted over all people
6|87|From their fathers, descendants, and brothers, We chose (certain) people and guided them to the right path
6|88|Such is the guidance of God by which He guides whichever of His servants He wants. If people worship idols, their deeds will be turned devoid of all virtue
6|89|These were the people to whom We gave the Book, Authority, and Prophesy. If some people do not accept Our guidance, it should not grieve you, (Muhammad), for We have made others who accept and protect Our guidance
6|90|We had guided the Prophets. (Muhammad), follow their guidance and say (to the people), "I do not ask any reward for what I have preached to you. It is my duty to awaken the world
6|91|They have no true respect of God when they say, "God has not sent anything to a mortal being." (Muhammad), tell them, "Who revealed the Book containing a light and guidance for the people which Moses brought? You wrote down only some parts of the original on paper and hid much, even after having learnt from it, that which neither you nor your fathers knew." Tell them, "God has (revealed the Quran)," and then leave them alone to pursue their useless investigations
6|92|We have blessed this Book (the Quran) and revealed it to confirm that which was revealed to the Prophets who lived before you and to warn the people of the mother land (Mecca) and those living around it. Those who believe in the Day of Judgment accept this and are steadfast in their prayers
6|93|Who are more unjust than those who ascribe lies to God or say that God has sent them revelations when nothing has been sent to them, or those who say that they can also bring down (from heaven) a book like that which God has revealed? Would that you could see the unjust in the agonies of death when the angels will come forward with their hands outstretched to take their souls out of their bodies and say, "This is the day when you will face humiliating torment for the falsehood that you ascribed to God and for your contemptuously disregarding of His revelations
6|94|God will say, "You have come to Us alone just as We created you at first. You have left behind all those whom We made your friends and We do not see with you any of the intercessors whom you believed to be your partners. Your relations with them have certainly been destroyed and your belief in them has left you (in the dark)
6|95|It is God who makes all kinds of seeds grow, brings forth the living from the dead, and the dead from the living. It is God who does such things, so how can you turn away from Him
6|96|It is He who kindles the light of dawn, and has made the night for you to rest, and the sun and moon as a means of calculation. This is the design of the Majestic and All-knowing God
6|97|It is God who created the stars so that you could find your way thereby in the darkness of the land and sea. We have explained Our evidence to the people of knowledge
6|98|It is He who has created you from a single soul. Some of you are settled (on earth) and some are still in the depository system of (their parents). We have shown the evidence (of Our existence) to the people who understand
6|99|It is He who has sent water down from the sky to let all kinds of plants grow; the vegetables with accumulated grains; palm-trees from which appear clusters of dates within easy reach; vineyards, olive groves, and pomegranates of all types. See the fruits when they are growing and when they are ripe. This, too, is evidence (of the existence of God) for those who believe
6|100|(Some) people considered the jinn to be equal to God even though God created them and they unknowingly ascribed to Him children, both boys and girls. God is too glorious to have the attributes which they ascribe to Him
6|101|How could the One Who is the Originator of the heavens and the earth and who has no companion, have a son? He created all things and has absolute knowledge of all things
6|102|He is God your Lord. There is no God but He. He has created all things. Worship Him for He is the Guardian of all things
6|103|No mortal eyes can see Him, but He can see all eyes. He is All-kind and All-aware
6|104|(Muhammad), tell them, "Clear proofs have certainly come to you from your Lord. Whoever tries to understand it will gain much but those who ignore it will only harm themselves. I am not (supposed) to watch over you (all the time)
6|105|Thus do We explain Our revelations to them. Let them say,"You have learned (those statements) from other people." We want to explain Our revelations only to those who have knowledge
6|106|(Muhammad), follow what has been revealed to you from your Lord; there is no God but He, and stay away from pagans
6|107|Had God wanted, they would not consider anything equal to Him. God has not appointed you to watch over them nor are you their guardian
6|108|Believers, do not say bad words against the idols lest they (pagans) in their hostility and ignorance say such words against God. We have made every nation's deeds seem attractive to them. One day they will all return to their Lord who will inform them of all that they have done
6|109|The unbelievers solemnly swear by God that if they were to be shown some miracle, they would certainly believe. (Muhammad), tell them, "Only with God are all the miracles." Even if a miracle was to take place, they still would not believe
6|110|We will turn their hearts and vision away (from a miracle); they did not have faith (in miracles) at the first time, and We will leave them blind in their rebellion
6|111|Had We sent the angels to them, made the dead speak to them, and resurrected all things before their very eyes, they still would not believe unless God willed it to be so. But, in fact, most of them ignore (the evidence)
6|112|We have made devilish enemies for every Prophet from among people and jinn. They whisper attractive but and deceitful words to each other. Had your Lord wanted, the devils would not have seduced people. Keep away from them and the falsehood which they invent
6|113|Let those who do not believe in the Day of Judgment listen to the deceitful words with pleasure and indulge in whatever sins they want
6|114|(Muhammad), say, "Should I seek any judge other than God? It is He Who has revealed this Book (Quran) to you with all its intricate details." Those to whom We have given the Bible know that the Quran has been revealed to you from your Lord in all Truth. Thus, you (people) must have no doubts about it
6|115|(After having revealed the Quran to you) in all truth and justice, your Lord's Word has been completed. No one can change His Words. He is All-hearing and All-knowing
6|116|Most of the people in the land will lead you away from God's guidance if you follow them; they only follow their own conjecture and preach falsehood
6|117|Your Lord knows best those who have gone astray from His path and those who are rightly guided
6|118|If you have faith in God's revelations, eat the flesh of the animal which has been slaughtered with a mention of His Name
6|119|Why should you not eat such flesh when God has told you in detail what is unlawful to eat under normal conditions. Most people, out of ignorance, are led astray by their desires. Your Lord knows best those who transgress
6|120|Stay away from both public and secret sins for a sinner will suffer for whatever he has committed
6|121|Do not eat the flesh of an animal which has been slaughtered without a mention of the Name of God; it is a sinful deed. Satan teaches his friends to argue with you. If you obey them, you will certainly be idol worshippers
6|122|Can the dead to whom We have given life and light so that they may walk among the people, be considered equal to those who can never come out of darkness? The deeds of the unbelievers are made to seem attractive to them
6|123|In every town We have placed some sinful leaders who always make evil plans. These plans will only work against their own souls but they do not realize this
6|124|When a miracle is shown to them, they say, "We will not believe unless we are shown a miracle like that shown to the messengers of God." God knows best whom to appoint as His Messenger. The sinful ones are worthless in the sight of God and they deserve a severe punishment for their evil plans
6|125|God will open the hearts of whomever He wants to guide to Islam, but He will tighten the chest of one whom He has led astray, as though he was climbing high up into the sky. Thus, God places wickedness on those who do not accept the faith
6|126|This is the path of your Lord and it is straight. We have explained Our revelations to those who take heed
6|127|They will live in peace with God. God protects them as a reward for their deeds; He is their Guardian
6|128|On the day when every one will be resurrected and the jinn will be told that they have made many people go astray, their friends from among people will say, "Lord, we benefitted from each other until death approached us." They will be told that their dwelling will be fire wherein they will live forever unless God wills it to be otherwise. Your Lord is All-wise and All-knowing
6|129|Thus do We make the unjust friends of one another because of their evil deeds
6|130|When people and jinn are asked, "Did not Messengers from your own people come to you to convey Our revelations and to warn you of the Day of Resurrection?" They will reply, "(Yes indeed)." The worldly life deceived them. They will testify that they were unbelievers
6|131|Your Lord did not want to destroy the towns, unjustly, without informing their inhabitants (of His guidance)
6|132|People's deeds are of different degrees and your Lord is not unaware of what people do
6|133|Your Lord is Self-sufficient and Merciful. Had He wanted, He could have destroyed you and replaced you by other people, just as He had created you from the offspring of others
6|134|Whatever you are promised will inevitably come true and you can do nothing to prevent it
6|135|(Muhammad), tell your people, "I shall do whatever I can and you may do whatever you want, but you will soon know who will be victorious. It is certain that the unjust will never have happiness
6|136|They set aside a share of the left-overs of their farming produce and cattle saying, "This is for God and that is for the idols." God does not receive the share of the idols but the share of God is given totally to the idols. How terrible is their decision
6|137|To many of the pagans, the murder of their children was made to seem attractive by the idols. This led them (the pagans) to confusion in their religion and to face their own destruction. Had God wanted, they would not have murdered their children. Keep away from them and their evil gains
6|138|They, (the pagans), have said that their cattle and farms are dedicated to private idols and that no one can consume (the produce) except those whom We wanted, in their opinion. They prohibited the riding of certain animals and they ate the flesh of certain animals slaughtered without a mention of the Name of God. Instead, they ascribed falsehood to Him. They will all be given an evil recompense for their sinful invention
6|139|They have also said, "Whatever exists in the wombs of these animals belongs to our people alone and it is not lawful for our women." However, if they are born dead, then everyone will have a share. God will give them what they deserve for (their unjust laws). God is All-merciful and All-knowing
6|140|Those who foolishly and ignorantly murdered their children, ascribed falsehood to God and made unlawful what He had given to them for their sustenance, have certainly lost much. They had gone far away from the right guidance
6|141|It is He who has created all kinds of gardens, those raised on trellises and those without, palm-trees and the crops of different seasons, and olives and pomegranates of all types. You may eat their fruits that they produce but pay God's share on the harvest day. Do not be excessive for God does not love those who are excessive
6|142|God has created animals, both small and large. Eat from what God has given you for your sustenance and do not follow in the footsteps of Satan. He is your sworn enemy
6|143|(Supposing) that there are eight pairs of cattle, two pairs of sheep, and two pairs of goats. Tell Me (which is lawful and which is not)? Are the two males unlawful (to eat) or the two females or those that are in the wombs of the females? If you are truthful, then, answer Me exactly
6|144|Of the two pairs of camels and cows, are the males unlawful (to eat) or the females or that which exists in the wombs of the females? Were you present when God commanded you to do this? Who are more unjust than those who ascribe falsehood to God and out of ignorance make others go astray? God does not guide the unjust
6|145|(Muhammad), tell them, "I do not find anything which has been made unlawful to eat in what has been revealed to me except carrion, blood flowing from the body, pork [for pork is absolutely filthy] and the flesh of the animals slaughtered without the mention of the name of God. However, in an emergency, when one does not have any intention of rebelling or transgressing against the law, your Lord will be All-forgiving and All-merciful
6|146|We made unlawful for the Jews all the claw-footed animals, fat of the cows, sheep and goats except what is found on their backs, intestines and whatever is mixed with their bones. Thus, did We recompense them for their rebellion and We are certainly truthful
6|147|They reject you. (Muhammad), tell them, "Your Lord's mercy is completely overwhelming, but no one can save the sinful from His wrath
6|148|The pagans will say, "Had God wanted, we would not have worshipped idols, nor would our fathers, nor would we have made anything unlawful." Others before them had also spoken such lies until they experienced the severity of Our wrath. (Muhammad), ask them, "Do you possess any knowledge? If so, tell us about it. You follow only conjectures and preach falsehood
6|149|Say, "Final authority belongs only to God. Had He wanted, He would have given you all guidance
6|150|Ask them to call their witness who will testify that God has made certain things unlawful. Even if they do testify, do not testify with them. Do not follow the desires of those who have rejected Our revelations and the pagans who do not believe in the Day of Judgment
6|151|(Muhammad), say, "Let me tell you about what your Lord has commanded: Do not consider anything equal to God; Be kind to your parents; Do not murder your children out of fear of poverty, for We give sustenance to you and to them. Do not even approach indecency either in public or in private. Take not a life which God has made sacred except by way of justice and law. Thus does He command you that you may learn wisdom
6|152|Do not handle the property of the orphans except with a good reason until they become mature and strong. Maintain equality in your dealings by the means of measurement and balance. No soul is responsible for what is beyond it's ability. Be just in your words, even if the party involved is one of your relatives and keep your promise with God. Thus does your Lord guide you so that you may take heed
6|153|This is My path and it is straight. Follow it and not other paths which will lead you far away from the path of God. Thus does God guide you so that you may become pious
6|154|We gave Moses the Book to complete (Our favor) for the righteous ones, the Book that contained a detailed explanation of all things, a guide and a mercy so that perhaps they would have faith in the Day of Judgment
6|155|This Book (Quran) which We have revealed is a blessed one. Follow its guidance and have piety so that you perhaps may receive mercy
6|156|and will not say that the Book was revealed only to two groups of people before you, or that you were ignorant of its knowledge
6|157|or proclaim, "Had the Book been revealed to us, we would have followed its guidance better than the (Jews and Christians). Evidence, guidance, and mercy have already come to you from your Lord. Who are more unjust than those who reject God's revelations and turn away from them? We will give an evil recompense to those who turn away from Our revelations and a terrible torment for their disregard (of Our guidance)
6|158|Are they waiting until the angels or your Lord come to them or for some miracles to take place? On the day when some miracles of God will take place, the belief of any soul will be of no avail to it unless some good deeds have been done with it, or it has been formed before the coming of such a day. (Muhammad), tell them, "Wait and we, too, are waiting
6|159|Some of those who have divided their religion into different sects are not your concern. Their affairs are in the hands of God Who will show them all that they have done
6|160|For a single good deed, one will be rewarded tenfold. But the recompense for a bad deed will be equal to that of the deed and no injustice will be done to anyone
6|161|(Muhammad), tell them, "My Lord has guided me to the right path, a well established religion and the upright tradition of Abraham who was not a pagan
6|162|Say, "My prayer, sacrifice, life, and death are all for God, the Lord of the Universe
6|163|Nothing is equal to Him. Thus are the commandments which I have received and he is the first Muslim (submitted to the will of God)
6|164|(Muhammad), tell them, "Should I take a lord besides God when He is the Lord of all things?" All one's evil deeds are against one's own soul. No one will be considered responsible for another's sins. You will all be returned to your Lord who will tell you what is right and wrong in disputed matters among you
6|165|On earth, We have made each of your generations the successors of their predecessors; We have made some of you do good deeds of a higher degree than others. He will test you in this way through what He has revealed to you. Your Lord's retribution is swift and He is certainly All-forgiving and All-merciful
7|1|Alif. Lam. Mim. Sad
7|2|A book has been revealed to you, (Muhammad). You should not hesitate to convey its warning and its good advice to the believers
7|3|(People), follow whatever is revealed to you from your Lord and do not follow other guardians besides Him. However, you pay very little attention (to Our words)
7|4|How many cities have We destroyed! Our wrath struck their people at night or during their midday siesta
7|5|When Our wrath struck them, they could do nothing but confess to their sins
7|6|We will certainly question the people and the Messengers sent to them
7|7|We will tell them with absolute certainty (what they had done) for We had never been absent from them (during their lifetime)
7|8|(Everyone's deeds) will certainly be weighed (and evaluated) on the Day of Judgment. Those whose good deeds weigh heavier than their bad deeds will have everlasting happiness
7|9|As for those whose bad deeds weigh heavier, they will lose their souls for their injustice to Our revelations
7|10|We have made you inhabit the land and provided you with the means of sustenance. Only a few of you give thanks
7|11|We created and shaped you, then told the angels to prostrate themselves before Adam. All the angels obeyed except Satan who did not
7|12|God asked, "What made you disobey Me?" Satan replied, "I am better than Adam, for You have created me out of fire and Adam out of clay
7|13|The Lord ordered Satan to get out (of Paradise) saying, "This is no place for you to be proud. Get out of this place, for you are worthless
7|14|Satan asked the Lord to give him respite (keep him alive) until the Day of Resurrection
7|15|The Lord told him, "We will grant you this respite
7|16|Then Satan said, "Because you have made me go astray, I shall certainly try to seduce people into straying from the right path
7|17|I shall attack them from all directions and You will not find many of them giving You thanks
7|18|The Lord told Satan, "Get out of this garden, for you are banished and despised. Hell will be filled with all of those who follow you
7|19|Then the Lord said, "Adam, stay in the garden with your spouse and eat whatever you want therein, but do not go near this tree lest you transgress
7|20|Satan tempted them to reveal that which was kept private from them and said, "Your Lord has not prohibited you (to eat the fruits of this tree) unless you want to be angels or immortal
7|21|Satan swore before them that he was giving them good advice
7|22|Thus, he deceitfully showed them (the tree). When they had tasted (fruits) from the tree, their private parts became revealed to them and they began to cover their private parts with leaves from the garden. Their Lord then called out to them saying, "Did I not forbid you to eat (fruits) from the tree and tell you that Satan was your sworn enemy
7|23|They replied, "Lord, we have done injustice to our souls. If You will not forgive us and have mercy on us, we shall certainly have incurred a great loss
7|24|The Lord told them to leave the garden as each other's enemies and go to earth to dwell and benefit from the means therein for an appointed time
7|25|He told them that, on earth, they would live, die, and be resurrected
7|26|Children of Adam, We have given you clothing to cover your private parts and for beauty, but the robe of piety is the best. Thus is the guidance of God so that you may take heed
7|27|Children of Adam, do not let Satan seduce you, as he caused your parents to be expelled from the garden and made them take off their clothes in order to show them their private parts. Satan and those like him see you but you do not see them. We have made the Satans as friends for those who have no faith
7|28|When (The faithless) commit indecent acts they say, "We found our fathers doing this and God has commanded us to do the same." (Muhammad) tell them that God does not command anyone to commit indecency. Do you speak for God, saying things of which you have no knowledge
7|29|Say, "My Lord has ordered me to maintain justice. (People), pay due attention (when worshipping God). Pray to Him sincerely and be devoted in your religion. Just as He gave you life, He will bring you back to life again (after you die)
7|30|He has guided one group (of people) and the other group go is doomed to astray; the latter group took Satan as their guardian instead of God and thought that they were rightly guided
7|31|Children of Adam, dress well when attending the mosques, eat and drink but do not be excessive for God does not love those who are excessive (in what they do)
7|32|(Muhammad), ask them, "Who has made it unlawful to maintain beauty and to eat the pure foods which God has created for His servants? They are made for the believers in this world and are exclusively for them in the life hereafter." Thus do We explain Our revelations to the people who have knowledge
7|33|(Muhammad), tell them, "My Lord has only prohibited indecent acts committed in public or in secret, all sins, unjust rebellion, considering things equal to God without any heavenly authority, and speaking for God without having any knowledge (of what He has said)
7|34|All people can only live for an appointed time. When their term ends, they will not remain (alive) even for a single hour, nor will they die before the appointed time
7|35|Children of Adam, when Messengers from among your own people come to you to preach My revelations, those who choose piety and reform themselves will have nothing to fear nor will they be grieved
7|36|But those who have rejected Our revelations out of pride will be the dwellers of hell fire wherein they will live forever
7|37|Who are more unjust than those who invent falsehoods against God and reject His revelations? These will have their share (of torment) which is ordained for them and when Our (angelic) Messengers come to them to cause them to die and ask them, "Where are those whom you had been worshipping besides God?" they will reply, "We had gone astray from the path of God." Thus, they will testify against their own souls by confessing their disbelief
7|38|(On the Day of Judgment) the Lord will say to them, "Join the group of jinn and people who lived before you, in hell." Each group, on entering hell, will curse the other dwellers, until all of them are brought together therein. The last group will accuse the first saying, "Lord, they made us go astray. Therefore, double their torment in the Fire." The Lord will reply, "For everyone of you there is a double torment, but you do not know it
7|39|The first will then say, "You are no better than us; suffer the torment as the result of your deeds
7|40|For those who have rejected Our revelations out of pride, no door to the heavens will be opened, nor will they be admitted into Paradise until a camel passes through the eye of a sewing needle. Thus do We recompense the criminals
7|41|For them, hell will be both a cradle and a blanket. Thus do We punish the unjust
7|42|The righteously striving believers - We do not impose on any soul that which is beyond its ability - are the dwellers of Paradise wherein they will live forever
7|43|We shall remove all grudges from their hearts. They will enjoy the flowing streams in the garden and will say, "God who guided us to this, deserves all praise. Had He not guided us, we would never have been able to find the right direction. The (angelic) Messengers of our Lord came to us with the Truth." They shall be told, 'This is the Paradise which you have inherited because of your good deeds
7|44|The people of Paradise will say to the dwellers of the fire, "We have found whatever our Lord promised has come true. Have you found whatever the Lord promised you to be true?" They will reply, "Yes, we have also found it to be true." Thereupon, someone will cry out, "God has condemned the unjust
7|45|who prevented others from the way of God, sought to make (the path) appear crooked, and had no belief in the Day of Judgment
7|46|There will be a barrier between the people of Paradise and hell. There will be people on the heights who know everyone by their faces and who will say to the people of Paradise, "Peace be upon you." They hope to enter Paradise but are not yet therein
7|47|When their eyes turn to the dwellers of hell, they will pray, "Lord, do not place us among the unjust
7|48|The people of the Heights will say to those (in hell) whose faces they recognize, "Why did your supporters and your pride not help you
7|49|They will also say, "Are these (the people of Paradise) the ones of whom you swore would receive no mercy from God?" They will continue, " People of Paradise, live therein without any fear or grief
7|50|The dwellers of the fire will ask the people of Paradise to give them some water or other things which God has granted to them. They will reply, "God has deprived the unbelievers of the blessings of Paradise
7|51|On that Day We will neglect those who were deceived by the worldly life and who treated their religion as a useless game, because they had forgotten such a day and rejected Our revelations
7|52|We have revealed the Book of guidance and mercy to the believers and We know all of its details
7|53|(Despite the clear details of Our guidance in the Book) do they still wait for further interpretations? On the Day (of Judgment) when its interpretations will be revealed, those who had ignored its guidance will confess, saying, "The Messengers of our Lord had certainly come to us with the Truth. Will anyone intercede for us or send us back (to life) so that we would be able to act in a different manner to that which we had done before?" These people have certainly lost their souls and their evil inventions (which they had used for false excuses) will vanish
7|54|Your Lord is God who established His dominion over the Throne (of the realm) after having created the heavens and the earth in six days. He made the night darken the day which it pursues at a (considerable) speed and He made the sun and the moon submissive to His command. Is it not He Who creates and governs all things? Blessed is God, the Cherisher of the Universe
7|55|Pray to your Lord humbly and privately. God does not love the transgressors
7|56|Do not destroy the land after it has been well established but pray to God, have fear of Him, and hope to receive His mercy. God's mercy is close to the righteous people
7|57|God sends the wind bearing the glad news of His mercy. When heavy clouds are formed, We drive them unto a barren country and rain down on it water to cause all kinds of fruits to grow. In the same way do We bring the dead to life again. Perhaps you would take heed
7|58|A good land produces plants, by the permission of its Lord, but a wicked land produces only miserable, bitter plants. Thus do We show a variety of evidence for those who give thanks
7|59|We sent Noah to his people. He told them, "Worship God for He is your only Lord. I am afraid of the punishment that you might suffer on the great Day (of Judgment)
7|60|A group of his people said to him, "You are absolutely wrong
7|61|(Noah) said, "My people, I am not in any error, rather I am a Messenger from the Lord of the Universe
7|62|sent to preach to you the message of my Lord and to give you good advice. I know what you do not know about God
7|63|Does it seem strange to you that a reminder from your Lord should be sent to a man, from among you, to warn you so that you might receive mercy
7|64|They accused him of telling lies. So We saved him and his companions in an ark and drowned those who called Our revelations mere lies. They were, no doubt, a blind people
7|65|We sent Hud to his brethren, the tribe of `Ad, who told them, "Worship God for He is your only Lord. Will you not become pious
7|66|A group of the unbelievers among his people said, "You look to us like a fool and we think that you are a liar
7|67|He replied, "My people, I am not a fool but a Messenger of the Lord of the Universe
7|68|I preach the message of my Lord to you and am a trustworthy advisor for you
7|69|Does it seem strange to you that a reminder from your Lord should be sent to a man among you so that He may warn you? Recall when God appointed you as successors of the people of Noah and increased your power over other people. Give thanks to God for His blessings so that perhaps you will have everlasting happiness
7|70|They said, "Have you come to make us worship God alone and give up what our fathers worshipped? If you are truthful, let the torment with which you have threatened us, strike us
7|71|He replied, "You will certainly be afflicted by wickedness and the wrath of God. Do you dispute with me about the names of that which you and your fathers have invented? God has given no authority to those names. Wait for God's decree and I, too, am waiting with you
7|72|Through Our mercy, We saved him and his companions and destroyed the unbelievers who called Our revelations mere lies
7|73|We sent Salih to his brethren, the tribe of Thamud, who told them, "Worship God your only Lord. Authoritative evidence has come to you from your Lord and this she-camel is the evidence for you from God. Let her graze in the land of God. Do not give her any trouble lest a painful torment will strike you
7|74|Recall (the time) when We settled you in the land as the heirs of the tribe of Ad and how you established mansions in the plains and carved homes out of the mountains. Give thanks to God for His favors and do not commit evil in the land
7|75|The proud ones among Salih's people asked his oppressed followers, "Do you (really) know that Salih is a Messenger of his Lord?" They replied, "We have faith in the Message which he preaches
7|76|The proud oppressors said, "We reject that which you believe in
7|77|They then slew the camel and rebelled against the orders of their Lord saying, " Salih, if you are truly a Messenger, let that torment with which you have threatened us come to pass
7|78|Suddenly, an earthquake jolted them and they were left motionless in their homes
7|79|He turned away from them saying, "My people, I preached the Message of my Lord to you and gave you good advice, but you do not love advisors
7|80|Lot told his people, "Why do you commit such indecent acts that have never been committed by anyone before
7|81|You engage in lustful activities with people instead of women. You have become transgressing people
7|82|His people had no answer to his remarks but to tell one another, "Expel him from our town; he and his people want to purify themselves
7|83|We saved (Lot) and his family except his wife who remained with the rest
7|84|We sent a torrential rain unto the (unbelievers). Consider how disastrous the end of the criminals was
7|85|We sent to the people of Midian their brother Shu'ayb who also told his people to worship God their only Lord. He said, "A guidance has come to you from your Lord. Maintain proper measures and weights in trade. Do not cause any deficiency in people's property or destroy the land after it has been reformed. This is for your own good, if you have any faith
7|86|Do not ambush the believers or hinder them from every path that leads them to God just because you wish to make such ways seem crooked. Recall the time when you were just a few in number and God multiplied you. Consider how terrible the end of the evil-doers was
7|87|If there are some of you who believe in the Message that I have been commanded to preach and there are others who do not, exercise patience until God judges among us. He is the best Judge
7|88|A proud group among Shu'ayb's people said, "We must expel you (Shu'ayb) and your followers from our town unless you give-up your faith and live as our own people." Shu'ayb asked them, "Will you use force against us
7|89|We would certainly be inventing falsehoods against God if we were to accept your way of life, when God has already saved us from it. We do not have to accept it unless God, our Lord, wills it. Our Lord's knowledge covers all things. We trust in Him and ask Him to judge among us and our people, for He is the best Judge
7|90|A group of the unbelievers among his people told the others, "If you follow Shu'ayb, you will certainly lose a great deal
7|91|Suddenly, an earthquake struck them and left them motionless in their homes
7|92|Those who called Shu'ayb a liar were destroyed as though they never existed. They certainly were the ones to lose a great deal
7|93|He turned away from them saying, "My people, I preached the Message of my Lord to you and gave you good advice. How could I be sorry for the unbelievers
7|94|To every town that We sent a Prophet, We tested its inhabitants through distress and adversity so that perhaps they would submit themselves to Us
7|95|We then replaced their misfortune with well-being until they were relieved and began saying, "Our fathers had also experienced good and bad days." Suddenly, We struck them (with torment) while they were all unaware (of what was happening)
7|96|Had the people of the towns believed (in Our revelations) and maintained piety, We would have certainly showered on them Our blessings from the sky and the earth. But they called Our revelations lies, thus Our torment struck them for their evil deeds
7|97|Did the people of the towns think themselves secure from Our wrath that could strike them at night during their sleep
7|98|or that which could seize them during their busy hours of the day
7|99|Did they consider themselves secure from the retribution of God? No one can have such attitude except those who are lost
7|100|Is it not a lesson for the successors of the past generations that had We wanted, We could have punished them for their sins, sealed their hearts and deprived them of hearing
7|101|(Muhammad), such were the stories of the people who lived in (different) towns in the past. We had sent Our Messengers to them with (certain) miracles but the people still did not believe in what they had rejected before. Such is how God seals the hearts of the unbelievers
7|102|We did not find many among them keeping their promises. However, We did find many evil-doers among them
7|103|After the time of those people, We sent Moses with Our miracles to Pharaoh and his people, but they too rejected Our miracles. Consider, how terrible the end of the evil-doers is
7|104|Moses told the Pharaoh, "I am a Messengers from the Lord of the Universe
7|105|I must only speak what is true about God. I have brought you miracles from your Lord; therefore, let the children of Israel go free
7|106|The Pharaoh asked Moses to show his miracles if he was telling the truth
7|107|So Moses threw down his staff and suddenly it turned into a real serpent
7|108|Then he uncovered his hand and it appeared sheer white to the onlookers
7|109|Some of the Pharaoh's nobles considered him to be no more than a skillful magician
7|110|and said, "He wants to expel you from your land." They asked (others), " what is your opinion in the matter
7|111|The others suggested holding Moses and his brother off and sending to all the cities
7|112|to bring together at the Pharaohs court all the skillful magicians
7|113|The magicians came to the Pharaoh and said, "We must have our reward if we are to gain a victory over him (Moses)
7|114|The Pharaoh replied, "In addition to your rewards, you will become my close friends thereafter
7|115|The magicians asked Moses, "Will you throw your staff first or shall we
7|116|He replied, "Throw yours first." Their great magic bewitched people's eyes and terrified them
7|117|We inspired Moses to throw his staff, and suddenly it began to swallow-up all that the magicians had (falsely) invented
7|118|Thus the Truth prevailed and their false art was banished
7|119|The magicians who were defeated on the spot and were proved to be worthless
7|120|threw themselves down in prostration
7|121|saying, "We declare our belief in the Lord of the Universe
7|122|the Lord of Moses and Aaron
7|123|The Pharaoh said to the magicians, "You declared your belief in him (Moses) without my permission. This is a plot to throw my people out of their city. But you will soon know
7|124|I will cut off your hands and feet on the alternate sides and crucify you all
7|125|The magicians said, "We will certainly return to Our Lord
7|126|You only take revenge on us because we believed in the Lord when we saw His miracles. Lord, grant us patience and let us die Muslims (submitted to God)
7|127|Some of the Pharaohs people said, "Will you let Moses and his people destroy the land and disregard you and your gods?" The Pharaoh said, "We will kill their sons and leave their women alive; they are under our domination
7|128|Moses told his people to seek help from God and exercise patience. The earth belongs to Him and He has made it the heritage of whichever of His servants He chooses. The final victory is for the pious ones
7|129|His people said, "We suffered a great deal before you came and we are still suffering even after you have come." Moses (tried to encourage them) by saying, "There is hope that your Lord will destroy your enemies and make you (their) successors in the land. So consider how you act
7|130|For years We afflicted Pharaoh's people with shortages in food so that perhaps they would take heed
7|131|But they would always ascribe their well-being to themselves and the misfortunes that they would experience to Moses and his people. Their fate is certainly in the hands of God but many of them do not know
7|132|They said to Moses, "No matter what miracle you show to bewitch us, we will not believe you
7|133|We sent upon them widespread calamities: floods of locusts, lice, frogs, and blood. All were distinct miracles but these criminals all the time remained proud
7|134|When the torment would strike them, they would ask Moses, "Pray for us to your Lord through your covenant with Him. If He saves us from the torment, we shall certainly believe in you and permit you and the children of Israel to leave
7|135|But when We relieved them from the torment for a given time, they again broke their promise
7|136|We took revenge on them for their rejecting Our miracles, by drowning them in the sea, but they were not aware of (reality)
7|137|We gave the suppressed people the blessed eastern and western regions as their inheritance. Thus, the promises of your Lord to the children of Israel all came true because of the patience which they exercised. He destroyed all the establishments of the Pharaoh and his people
7|138|We helped the children of Israel to cross the sea. They came to a people who worshipped idols. The Israelites demanded Moses to make gods for them like those of the idol-worshippers. Moses told them, "You are an ignorant people
7|139|What these people worship is doomed to be destroyed and their deeds are based on falsehood
7|140|Should I choose for you a lord other than God who has favored you above all other people
7|141|Children of Israel, when I saved you from the Pharaoh and his people who made you suffer the worst kinds of torment, killing your sons and keeping your women alive, it was a great trial for you from your Lord
7|142|We told Moses to stay with Us for thirty nights (in the mountains) but added ten nights more so his appointment with his Lord came to an end after forty nights. Moses had appointed his brother Aaron as his deputy among his people during his absence saying, "Try to reform them and do not follow the way of the evil-doers
7|143|During the appointment, the Lord spoke to Moses. He asked the Lord to show Himself so that he could look at Him. The Lord replied, "You can never see Me. But look at the mountain. If the mountain remains firm only then will you see Me." When the Lord manifested His Glory to the mountain, He turned it into dust and Moses fell down upon his face senseless. After regaining his senses, Moses said, "Lord, You are all Holy. I repent for what I asked you to do and I am the first to believe in You
7|144|The Lord said to Moses, "I have given you distinction above the people by speaking to you and giving you My Message. Receive what I have given to you and give Us thanks
7|145|We wrote advice and laws for him on Tablets about all kinds of things, saying, "Follow them and command your people to follow the good advice therein, and I will show you the dwellings of the evil-doers
7|146|We will deprive those who are wrongly proud in the land of the blessing of revelations. Even if they would see all kinds of miracles, they would not have faith, or even to see the right path, they would not follow it. They would follow the rebellious way if they were to find one; in their ignorance, they have called Our revelations mere lies
7|147|The deeds of those who have called Our revelations and belief in the Day of Judgment mere lies, will be turned devoid of all virtue. Can they expect to receive a reward for their deeds other than that which is the result of their deeds
7|148|In Moses' absence, his people manufactured a hollow sounding calf out of their ornaments. Could they not see that it could not speak to them or provide them with any guidance? They gained only evil by worshipping the calf
7|149|When they found that they had believed in the wrong thing, they regretfully said, "If our Lord will not have mercy on us and forgive us, we will certainly be lost
7|150|When Moses returned to his people with anger and sorrow, he said, "What you have done in my absence is certainly evil. Why were you hasty about the commandments of your Lord?" He threw away the Tablets (which contained the commandments of God), grabbed his brother and started to pull him to himself. His brother begged him saying, "Son of my mother, the people suppressed me and almost killed me. Do not humiliate me before the enemies or call me unjust
7|151|Moses prayed, "Lord, forgive me and my brother and admit us into Your mercy; you are the most Merciful
7|152|(The Lord said), "Those who worshipped the calf will be afflicted by the wrath of their Lord and disgraced in their worldly life. Thus, We will recompense those who invent falsehood
7|153|To those who commit bad deeds, but, then, repent and believe (in God), Your Lord will certainly be All-forgiving and All-merciful
7|154|When Moses' anger calmed down, he collected the Tablets. On one of them was written, "God's mercy and guidance are for those who have fear of Him
7|155|Moses selected seventy men from his people to attend Our appointment. (In Our presence). When an earthquake jolted them to death, Moses said, "Lord, had You wanted to destroy them, why did You not destroy them and me before. Are You destroying us for what the fools among us have done? This (destruction) is only a trial through which You cause some to go astray and guide others. You are our Guardian. Forgive us and have mercy on us; You are the best of those who forgive
7|156|Grant us well-being in this life and in the life hereafter for we have turned ourselves to You." The Lord replied, "My torment only afflicts those whom I want to punish, but My mercy encompasses all things. I shall grant mercy to those who maintain piety, pay their religious tax, and those who have faith in Our revelations
7|157|There are those who follow the Messengers, the illiterate Prophet (not conventionally educated), whose description they find written in the Torah and the Gospel. [He (the Messengers) enjoins them to do good and forbids them to do all that is unlawful, makes lawful for them all that is pure and unlawful all that is filthy, removes their burdens and the entanglements in which they are involved]. Those who believe in him, honor and help him, and follow the light which is sent down to him, will have everlasting happiness
7|158|(Muhammad), tell them, "People, I have come to you all as the Messengers of God, to whom the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth belongs. There is no God but He. In His hands are life and death. Have faith in God and His Messengers, the unlettered Prophet who believes in God and His words. Follow him so that you will perhaps have guidance
7|159|Among the people of Moses are some whose guidance and Judgment are based on the Truth
7|160|We divided the descendants of Israel into twelve tribes and told Moses to strike the rock with his staff to let twelve fountains gush out therefrom; his people had asked him to supply them with water. The twelve flowing springs were divided among them (a spring for each tribe) and each tribe knew its drinking place well. We provided them with shade from the clouds, sent down manna and quails to them for food, and told them to eat the pure things which We had given them. They did not do injustice to Us but they wronged themselves
7|161|When they were told, "Settle down in this town, eat as you wish, seek forgiveness and enter the gate prostrating yourselves (in obedience to the Lord) and We will forgive you your sins and increase the reward of the righteous people
7|162|the unjust among them changed the words which they were told to say (in the prayer). Therefore, We sent upon them torment from the sky for their wrong deeds
7|163|(Muhammad), ask them about the (people of the) towns on the seashore. They had transgressed by catching fish on the Sabbath. Each Sabbath the fish came openly within their reach but not so on other days. Thus, We were testing them because of their evil deeds
7|164|When a group of them questioned another group saying, "Why do you preach to those whom God has decided to destroy or punish by a severe torment?" they replied, "We preach to them for we are responsible in the sight of your Lord and so that perhaps they may have fear of God
7|165|When they (the unjust people) forgot what was preached to them, We saved the preachers from evil and afflicted the unjust for their evil deeds, with a dreadful torment
7|166|When they crossed the limit of the prohibition, We made them turn into detested apes
7|167|(Muhammad), consider, when your Lord declared to the (Israelites) His decision to raise a people above them who would make them suffer the worst kinds of torments until the Day of Judgment. Certainly your Lord's retribution is swift. He is All-forgiving and All-merciful
7|168|We divided them into nations on the earth; some are righteous and others are not. We tested them with well-being and hardship so that they might return (to the right path)
7|169|Their descendants who inherited the Book gained (by bribery only) worthless things from the worldly life saying, "We shall be forgiven (for what we have done). They would have even doubled such gains if they could have received more. Did they not make a covenant (with God) in the Book not to speak any thing other than the Truth about God and to study its contents well? The life hereafter is much better for the pious ones. Will you not then think
7|170|Those who devote themselves to the teachings of the Book and are steadfast in prayer (should know that) the reward of those who reform themselves will not be lost
7|171|When We raised the mount above them as a shadow and made it speak to them, they thought that it would fall on them. We told them to devote themselves decisively to what was given to them and follow its guidance so that they would have fear of God
7|172|When your Lord asked all the offspring of Adam (before their birth), "Am I not your Lord?" All of them testified and bore witness to their testimony that on the Day of Judgment they would not say, "We were not aware of this (fact)
7|173|or say, "Our fathers worshipped idols before us and we as their descendants followed them. Would you then destroy us because of what the followers of falsehood have done
7|174|Thus do We explain Our revelations so that they might return to (the right path)
7|175|(Muhammad), tell them the story of the person whom We inspired with Our guidance, but who detached himself from it and who was then pursued by Satan until he turned into a rebel
7|176|Had We wanted, We could have raised him to an exalted position but he clung to his earthly life and followed his own (evil) desires. Such person's bad habits are like those of a lazy dog (in a warm climate) who always has its tongue hanging out whether you chase it away or leave it alone. Such are the people who have called Our revelations mere lies. (Muhammad), tell them such stories so that perhaps they will think
7|177|How terrible is the example of those who have rejected Our revelations and have done injustice only to themselves
7|178|Those whom God has guided have the true guidance, but those whom He has caused to go astray are certainly lost
7|179|We have destined many men and jinn for hell. They have hearts but do not understand, eyes but do not see. They have ears but do not hear. They are worse than lost cattle. These are the heedless ones
7|180|God has the most blessed Names. You should address Him in your worship by these Names and keep away from those who pervert them. They will be recompensed for their (evil) deeds
7|181|Among Our creatures are a group who guide and judge with the Truth
7|182|We gradually lead those who have called Our revelations mere lies, to destruction. Their destruction will be such that they will not even notice how it seized them
7|183|Though I have given them a respite, My plan against them is well established
7|184|Why will they not understand that their companion (Muhammad) is not possessed by jinn. (Muhammad) is only a (Divinely) authorized preacher
7|185|Have they not considered the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth and everything that God has created? Perhaps death approaches them. In what kind of guidance can they have faith besides that of the Quran
7|186|No one can guide those whom God has caused to go astray and has left to continue blindly in their rebellion
7|187|They ask you (Muhammad), "When will the Day of Judgment be?" Tell them, "My Lord knows best. It is He who has appointed its time. It will be a grave hour both in the heavens and the earth. It will only approach you suddenly." They say, "It seems that you know about the coming of the Day of Judgment." Tell them, "Only God knows about it and most people do not know
7|188|(Muhammad), say, "I have no control over my benefits or sufferings, without the will of God. Had I known about the unseen, I would have gained much good and would have faced no suffering. I am only a warner and I preach the glad news to the believing people
7|189|It is God Who created you from a single soul and out of it made its spouse to bring it comfort. When he (man) engaged in carnal relations with her, she conceived a light burden which she had to carry. When the baby grew in her womb, they (husband and wife) both prayed to their Lord, "If You grant us a healthy son we shall certainly give you thanks
7|190|When they were given a healthy son, they began to love him as much as they loved God. God is too exalted to be loved equally to anything else
7|191|Do they (the pagans) consider things that do not create anything but are themselves created equal to God
7|192|The idols are things that are not able to help others or even themselves
7|193|Believers, even if you invite them to true guidance, they will not follow you. It makes no difference whether you invite them or whether you keep quiet
7|194|Those whom you (pagans) worship besides God, are themselves servants just like yourselves. If your claim was true, they should answer your prayers
7|195|Do they (the idols) have feet to walk, hands to hold things, eyes to see, and ears to hear? (Muhammad), tell them (the pagans) to call on their idols for help and to plan against Me without delay
7|196|The (true) Guardian is certainly God who has revealed the Book and is the Guardian of the righteous ones
7|197|The idols which you (the pagans) worship besides God can neither help you nor themselves
7|198|(Muhammad), if you invite them to the right guidance, they will not listen to you. You will see them looking at you but they do not really see
7|199|Have forgiveness, preach the truth, and keep away from the ignorant ones
7|200|If Satan will try to seduce you, seek refuge from God. God is All-hearing and All-knowing
7|201|When a satanic thought starts to bother the pious ones, they understand and see the light
7|202|while their brethren ceaselessly try to drag them into error
7|203|If you, (Muhammad), do not show them a miracle, they will keep on insisting that you must show them one. Say, "I only follow what is revealed to me from my Lord. This (Quran) contains wisdom for you from your Lord. It contains guidance and mercy for those who have faith
7|204|Whenever the Quran is recited (to you), listen to it quietly so that you may receive mercy
7|205|Remember your Lord deep within yourselves, humbly and privately - instead of shouting out loud - (in prayer) in the mornings and evenings and do not be of the heedless ones
7|206|Those who are near to your Lord do not disdain from worshipping Him. They glorify Him and prostrate themselves (in obedience to Him)
8|1|They (the believers) ask you (Muhammad) about the booty captured (from the enemies) during a war. Tell them, "It belongs to God and the Messengers. If you have faith, have fear of God. Settle the disputes among yourselves and obey God and His Messengers
8|2|When God is mentioned, the true believers begin to feel fear of Him in their hearts and when His revelations are recited to them their faith strengthens. In God alone do they trust
8|3|They are steadfast in prayer and spend part of what We have given them for the cause of God
8|4|Such are the true believers. Their reward from their Lord will be high ranks, forgiveness, and a generous provision
8|5|A group among the believers dislike (God's decree about the booty captured in war) as well as His command that you come out of your home for a truthful purpose (to fight for justice)
8|6|Knowing it well (that a fight in which they are to take part is about to take place), they act as though they are being driven to death which they can see before their very eyes. Despite their knowledge of the truth, they still argue with you
8|7|When God promised to grant you (believers) victory over either one of the two groups, you wished to have control over the unarmed one. God decided to prove (to you) the truth of His promises and to destroy the unbelievers
8|8|so that the truth would stand supreme and falsehood would exist no more, even though the criminals dislike it
8|9|When you (believers) begged for assistance from your Lord, He said, "I am helping you with a thousand angels, all in rows marching one after the other
8|10|God has sent this glad news to comfort your hearts. Victory is in the hands of God alone. God is Majestic and All-wise
8|11|The slumber that overcame you was from God that brought you peace. He showered water from the sky over you to clean you, remove satanic wickedness from you, strengthen your hearts, and grant you steadfastness
8|12|Your Lord inspired the angels saying, "I am with you. Encourage the believers. I shall cast terror into the hearts of the unbelievers and you will strike their heads and limbs
8|13|they have opposed God and His Messengers." For those who oppose God and His Messengers, God has prepared a severe retribution
8|14|We will say to them, "Endure the torment (as a consequence of your evil deeds); the unbelievers deserve nothing better than (the torment) of fire
8|15|Believers, do not retreat when facing the marching army of the unbelievers, for no believer will turn back at that time except for strategic reasons or to join another band
8|16|(Whoever deserts the believers) will incur the wrath of God and will dwell in hell, a terrible dwelling
8|17|It was not you (believers) but God who slew the pagans. It was not you (Muhammad) but God who threw dust at them. He did this as a favorable test for the believers. God is All-hearing and All-knowing
8|18|This is how God causes the (evil) plans of the unbelievers to fail
8|19|If you (the pagans) are looking for conquest, you certainly had a great chance (at the battle of Badr). But if you were to give up such a desire, it would be better for you. If you again wage war against Us, We will be ready for such a confrontation. Your man-power will be of no help to you no matter how much you have; God is with the believers
8|20|Believers, obey God and His Messengers and do not turn away from Him when you hear (His commands)
8|21|Do not be like those who said that they have heard (the Messenger's commands) but do not pay any attention to them
8|22|The most wicked beasts in the sight of God are the deaf and the dumb who have no understanding
8|23|Had they possessed any virtue, God would certainly have made them hear. Even if God were to make them hear, they would still turn away from (the words of God)
8|24|Believers, listen to God and the Messengers when they call you to that which gives you life. Know that God is between a man and his heart and that before Him you will all be brought together
8|25|Guard yourselves against discord among yourselves so that it will not mislead anyone of you, especially the unjust, and know that God's retribution is most severe
8|26|Recall the time when you (the believers) were only a few suppressed people in the land, afraid of being terrorized by the people. God gave you shelter, supported you with His help, and bestowed on you pure provisions so that perhaps you would give Him thanks
8|27|Believers, do not be dishonest to God and the Messengers or knowingly abuse your trust
8|28|Know that your possessions and children are a temptation for you and that God has the greatest reward (for the righteous ones)
8|29|Believers, if you fear God, He will give you guidance, will expiate your bad deeds and forgive you. God's favors are the greatest
8|30|The unbelievers planned to imprison, murder or expel you (Muhammad) from your city. They make evil plans but God too plans and God's plans are the best
8|31|When Our revelations are recited to them (the unbelievers), they say, "We have heard them. Had we wanted, we could also have composed such statements; they are no more than ancient legends
8|32|They also say, "Lord, if this (Quran) is the Truth from you, shower down stones on us from the sky instead of rain or send us a painful punishment
8|33|God would not punish them while you were among them nor while they were asking for forgiveness
8|34|Why should God not punish them when they hinder people from entering the sacred mosque? They are not its true patrons. Only the righteous ones are its patrons, but most of the pagans do not know
8|35|Their (unbelievers) prayer at the mosque is nothing but whistling and clapping of hands. We shall tell them, "Suffer torment for your disbelief
8|36|The disbelievers spend their wealth to turn men away from the way of God. They will continue to spend but it will become a source of regret for them and they will be defeated (because of their evil plans). The disbelievers will be gathered all togdher in Hell
8|37|God will separate the wicked from the pure and will pile the wicked ones on top of one anothcr to be cast into hell. They are indeed lost
8|38|Muhammad, tell the unbelievers, if you give up your evil behavior, God will forgive whatever you have done in the past. But if you transgras again, your fate will be the same as that of those (unbelievers) who lived before you
8|39|(Fight them so that idolatry will not exist any more and God's religion will stand supreme. If theygive up the idols), God will be Well Aware of what they do
8|40|If the (unbelievers) turn away from the faith, God is you (believers) best Guardian and best Helper
8|41|Know that whatever property you may gain, one fifth belongs to God, the Messenger, the kindred, orphans, the needy and those who need money while on a journey. (This is the law) if you believe in God and what We revealed to Our Servant on the Day of Distinction (Badr) when the armies confronted each other. God has power over all things
8|42|Recall when your army was positioned at the less defensible brink of the valley, (the pagans') army had the more defensible higher side of the valley and the caravan was led (out of your reach) below. This situation did not take place according to your previous plans, otherwise, everything would have been different. (It was God's plan) to place you in a vulnerable position, exposed to the enemy and it was His plan to lead the caravan out of your reach) so that His decree that you would be granted a victory by a miracle would become a doubtless fact and so that those who were to be destroyed would face destruction with a clear knowledge of the Truth and those who were to survive would also survive with a clear knowledge of the Truth. God is All-hearing and All-knowing
8|43|In your dream, God showed (the pagans' army) as being only a few in number, for if He had showed them as a great number, you would have lost courage and would have started to quarrel among yourselves concerning this matter. But God saved you from that condition; He knows what is in your hearts
8|44|When you met the pagans' army, God made them appear fewer in your eyes and you appear fewer in their eyes so that His miracle of granting you (an incredible) victory could easily be fulfilled. To God do all things return
8|45|Believers, stand firm when you meet a band of your enemy and remember God often so that you may have everlasting happiness
8|46|Obey God and His Messenger. Do not quarrel with each other lest you fail or lose honor. Exercise patience; God is with those who have patience
8|47|Do not be like those who marched out boastfully to show off their strength to people and hinder people from the way of God. God encompasses everyone's activities
8|48|Satan made their (pagans') deeds seem attractive to them and said to them, "No one today is more powerful than you and I am your supporter." But when the two armies confronted one another and the pagans were defeated, then satan betrayed his friends saying, "I am not with you any more; I see what you do not see and I am afraid of God." God is severe in His retribution
8|49|The hypocrites and those whose hearts are sick, say, "The (believers') religion has deceived them." Those who trust in God will find Him Majestic and All-wise
8|50|Would that you could have seen the angels taking the souls of the unbelievers away from their bodies and smiting their faces and their backs saying, "Suffer the burning torment
8|51|This is the result of their deeds. God is not unjust to His servants
8|52|The same thing happened to the people of Pharaoh and those who lived before them. They rejected the revelations of God and, because of their sins, His retribution struck them. God is All-powerful and stern in His retribution
8|53|God does not change the favor that He has bestowed on a nation unless that nation changes what is in its soul. God is All-hearing and All-knowing
8|54|Like the people of the Pharaoh and those who lived before them, (the unbelievers) rejected the revelations of God. We destroyed them for their sins and drowned the people of Pharaoh. They were all unjust
8|55|The most wicked creatures in the sight of God are the unbelievers who never have faith
8|56|who make promises but break them every time, and who have no piety
8|57|When you capture the (unbelievers) during a fight, teach them a lesson so that they thereafter will always be aware of the threat of your power
8|58|If you are afraid of the treachery of some of your allies, you may disregard your treaty with them. God does not love the treacherous ones
8|59|The unbelievers should not think that they can really escape Us or that they can never be defeated
8|60|Mobilize your (defensive) force as much as you can to frighten the enemies of God and your own enemies. This also will frighten those who are behind them whom you do not know but God knows well. Whatever you spend for the cause of God, He will give you sufficient recompense with due justice
8|61|If they (the unbelievers) propose peace, accept it and trust in God. God is All-hearing and All-knowing
8|62|If they want to deceive you, God is All-sufficient for you. It is God who supported you with His own help and with that of the believers
8|63|among whose hearts He has placed affection and unity. If you were to spend the wealth of the whole earth, you would not have been able to unite their hearts but God has been able to unite them. God is Majestic and All-wise
8|64|Prophet, God and the believers who follow you are sufficient support for you
8|65|Prophet, mobilize the believers for the battle. It will take only twenty of your men who are steadfast (in prayer) to defeat two hundred unbelieving men. Your two hundred men would defeat their two thousand; the unbelievers have no understanding
8|66|Now that God has eased your burden, He has found you to be weak. A hundred of your steadfast men would defeat two hundred of theirs and a thousand of yours would defeat two thousand of the unbelievers, by the will of God. God is with those who have patience
8|67|The Prophet is not supposed to take any captives to strengthen his position on the earth. You want worldly gains but God wants the life hereafter for you. God is Majestic and All-wise
8|68|(Had you taken captives) before being allowed by God's revelations, a great torment would have struck you for what you had done
8|69|Use what you have acquired (from the battle) as your own good, lawful property. Have fear of God; He is All-forgiving and All-merciful
8|70|Prophet, tell the captives with you, "If God finds anything good in your hearts, He will give you a better reward than that which was taken from you and will forgive you. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
8|71|Do not be surprised that they want to be dishonest with you; they have always been dishonest with God. However, He has power over them. God is All-knowing and All-wise
8|72|The believers who left their homes and strove for the cause of God, through their property and in person and those who gave refuge to them and helped them will be each other's guardians. The believers who did not leave their homes are not your guardians until they too leave their homes. If they ask you for help in a religious cause, you must help them against their enemies unless their enemies have a peace treaty with you. God is Well Aware of what you do
8|73|The unbelievers are each other's friends. If you (the believers) do not keep the same among yourselves in the land, there will come into being widespread idolatry and great evil
8|74|The believers who left their homes, and strove for the cause of God and those who gave them refuge and helped them, are true believers. They will have forgiveness (from their Lord) and (will be granted) honorable provisions
8|75|Those who accepted the faith later, left their homes and strove with you for the cause of God are also your people. They relatives are nearer to each other according to the Book of God. God has knowledge of all things
9|1|God and His Messenger declare the abrogation of the peace treaty that existed between them and the pagans
9|2|However, during the four sacred months, they (pagans) may travel peacefully through the land. Know (pagans) that you cannot make God helpless, but it is God who has the power to disgrace the unbelievers
9|3|This Announcement from God and His Messenger is to be made to the people on the day of the great Pilgrimage; God and His Messenger have declared no amnesty for the pagans. If you (pagans) repent, it would be better for you, but if you turn away (from God), know that you cannot make God helpless. (Muhammad) tell the unbelievers that a painful punishment has been prepared for them
9|4|This does not apply to the pagans with whom you have a valid peace treaty and who have not broken it from their side or helped others against you. You (believers) must fulfill the terms of the peace treaty with them. God loves the pious ones
9|5|When the sacred months are over, slay the pagans wherever you find them. Capture, besiege, and ambush them. If they repent, perform prayers and pay the religious tax, set them free. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
9|6|If any of the pagans ask you to give them refuge, give them asylum so that they may hear the words of God. Then, return them to their towns for they are an ignorant people
9|7|How can the pagans, except those with whom you have established a peace treaty in the precinct of the Sacred Mosque, have a covenant with God and His Messenger? If they respect the pact, you too should also follow its terms. God loves the pious ones
9|8|How could God and His Messenger grant them (pagans) peace when if they were to acquire superiority over you, they would respect none of the peace treaties nor their kindred relations with you! They only try to please you by paying lip-service to you but their hearts are against you and most of them are evil-doers
9|9|They have sold God's revelations for a paltry price and have created obstacles in the way of God. What they have done is evil
9|10|They do not respect their promises nor their family ties with the believers. They are transgressors
9|11|If they repent, perform their prayers, pay religious tax, they would be your brothers in the religion. We explain Our revelations to people of knowledge
9|12|Fight against the leaders of the unbelievers if they violate their established peace treaty with you and revile your faith, to force them to stop their aggression against you. You do not have to bind yourselves to such a treaty
9|13|Why will you not fight against a people who have broken their peace treaty with you, have decided to expel the Messenger (from his home town), and who were the first to disregard the peace treaty? If you are true believers, you should only have fear of God
9|14|Fight them. May God punish them by your hands, humiliate them, give you victory over them, delight the hearts of the believers
9|15|and appease their anger. God forgives whomever He wants and He is All-knowing and All-wise
9|16|Do you think that God will not make any distinction between those of you who have fought for His cause and have relied on no one other than God, His Messenger, and the faithful ones, and other people? God is Well Aware of what you do
9|17|The pagans do not have any right to establish (and patronize) the mosque of God while they testify against their souls to its disbelief. Their deeds are devoid of all virtue and they will live forever in hell fire
9|18|Only those who believe in God, the Day of Judgment, perform their prayers, pay the religious tax, and have fear of God alone have the right to establish and patronize the mosque of God so that perhaps they will have the right guidance
9|19|Do you (pagans), because you served water to the pilgrims and constructed the Sacred Mosque, consider yourselves equal to those who have believed in God, the Day of Judgment, and have fought for the cause of God? In the sight of God you (pagans) are not equal to the believers. God does not guide the unjust
9|20|To those who have believed in God, left their homes, and fought for His cause with their possessions and in person, God will grant high ranks and success
9|21|Their Lord will give the glad news of His granting mercy to them, His pleasure, and His admitting them to a Paradise full of everlasting bounties wherein they will live forever
9|22|The reward that God will bestow on His servants is the greatest
9|23|Believers, do not accept your fathers and brothers as your guardians if they prefer disbelief to faith, lest you be unjust
9|24|(Muhammad), tell them, "If your fathers, children, brothers, spouses, relatives, the property that you possess, the trade you fear may have no profit and the homely life are more beloved to you than God, His Messenger and fighting for His cause, wait until God fulfills His decree (of making the right distinct from the wrong). God does not guide the evil-doers
9|25|God has helped you on many occasions including the day of Hunayn (name of a place near Mecca). When you were happy with the number of your men who proved to be of no help to you and the whole vast earth seemed to have no place to hide you (from your enemies) and you turned back in retreat
9|26|God gave confidence to His Messenger and the believers and helped them with an army which you could not see. God punished the unbelievers; this is the only recompense that the unbelievers deserve
9|27|After that occasion God forgave those whom He wanted. God is All-knowing and All-merciful
9|28|Believers, the pagans are filthy. Do not let them come near to the Sacred Mosque after this year. If you are afraid of poverty, He will make you rich if He wishes, by His favor. God is All-knowing and All-wise
9|29|Fight against those People of the Book who have no faith in God or the Day of Judgment, who do not consider unlawful what God and His Messenger have made unlawful, and who do not believe in the true religion, until they humbly pay tax with their own hands
9|30|Some of the Jews have said that Ezra is the son of God and Christians have said the same of Jesus. This is only what they say and it is similar to what the unbelievers who lived before them had said. May God destroy them wherever they exist
9|31|They (unconditionally) obeyed the rabbis and the monks and worshipped the Messiah, son of Mary, as they should have obeyed God. They were commanded to worship no one besides God who is the only God and who is too exalted to be considered equal to any idols
9|32|They would like to extinguish the light of God with a blow from their mouths, but even though the unbelievers may dislike it, God has decided to let His light shine forever
9|33|It is God Who sent His Messenger with guidance and a true religion that will prevail over all other religions, even though the pagans may dislike it
9|34|Believers, many rabbis and monks consume other people's property by false means and create obstacles in the way of God. Those who horde gold and silver and do not spend (anything out of it) for the cause of God, should know that their recompense will be a painful torment
9|35|on the Day of Judgment and that their treasures will be heated by the fire of hell and pressed against their foreheads, sides and back with this remark, "These are your own treasures which you hoarded for yourselves. See for yourselves what they feel like
9|36|According to the Book of God, from the day He created the heavens and the earth, the number of months are twelve, four of which are sacred. (This is part of the law) of the religion. Do not commit injustice against your souls during the sacred months but fight all the pagans just as they fight against all of you. Know that God is with the pious ones
9|37|To disregard the observation of the sacred months and to observe it during the non-sacred months is to add more to one's disbelief. This causes the unbelievers to go further astray. One year they (the pagans) consider a sacred month not sacred, (and observe it during a non-sacred month) but the next year they consider it sacred at the right time. By dealing with the sacred months in such a manner, they think that they have observed the laws of God, but, in fact, they have changed them. Their evil deeds seem attractive to them but God does not guide the unbelieving people
9|38|Believers, why is it that when you are told to march for the cause of God, you seem to linger at home. Have you given preference to the worldly life over the life hereafter? The worldly gains compared to those of the next life are but very little
9|39|If you do not march for His cause, He will afflict your with a painful punishment and replace you by another nation and your (destruction) will not harm Him at all. God has power over all things
9|40|If you do not help him, (Muhammad), God has already helped him. When the unbelievers expelled him and he was one of the two people in the cave telling his friend, "Do not worry; God is with us," then God gave him confidence and supported him with an army which you did not see and He defeated the cause of the disbelievers and made His own cause stand supreme. God is Majestic and All-wise
9|41|Whether unarmed or well equipped, march and fight for the cause of God with your possessions and in person. This would be better for you, if only you knew it
9|42|Had the gain been immediate or the journey shorter, they (hypocrites) would certainly have followed you, (Muhammad), but it was too far for them. They will swear by God, "Had we had the ability, we would certainly have marched with you." They destroy only themselves and God knows that they are lying
9|43|May God forgive you! (Muhammad), why did you not let them join the army so that you could discern the liars from the truthful ones
9|44|Those who believe in God and the Day of Judgment do not ask you whether they should fight for the cause of God with their property and in person, or not. God knows all about the pious ones
9|45|Only those who do not believe in God and the Day of Judgment ask you such questions because their hearts are full of doubts and they cannot make any final decisions
9|46|Had they (the hypocrites) wanted to join your army, they would have prepared themselves, but God did not wish to motivate them, so He caused them to linger behind with those whose joining you in battle would be of no use
9|47|Had they joined you, they would have been of no help to you but would have just caused confusion and trouble among you by sneaking through the ranks where some of you would be ready to listen to them. God knows best the unjust
9|48|Even prior to this, they tried to cause trouble and to turn your affairs upside-down until the truth came and the cause of God triumphed against their desires
9|49|Some of them ask you, "Make us exempt from taking part in the battle and do not try to tempt us by telling us what we may gain from the battle; many people have died in the battle." Hell certainly encompasses the unbelievers
9|50|If you gain success, it grieves them but if you suffer hardship, they turn away from you saying, "It's good that we took our affairs into our own hands
9|51|(Muhammad), say, "Nothing will happen to us besides what God has decreed for us. He is our Guardian. In God alone do the believers trust
9|52|For us, you can anticipate nothing other than Paradise if we are killed or success if we triumph. However, what we can anticipate for you is either punishment by the hands of God or by ours. Wait and we, too, are waiting with you
9|53|Say, "Whether you spend your wealth for the cause of God, willingly or reluctantly, it will never be accepted from you; you are an evil doing people
9|54|What prevents their offerings from being accepted is their disbelief in God and His Messenger, their lack of interest in prayer and spending for the cause of God reluctantly
9|55|Let not their property and children tempt you; God wants to punish them through their things in this life so that their souls will depart while they are unbelievers
9|56|They swear by God that they are believers like you but they are not believers. They are a people who only cause differences
9|57|They are so afraid of you that had there been a place for them to seek refuge, a cave or some entrance in which to hide themselves from you, they would have madly rushed therein
9|58|They blame you about the distribution of the welfare funds. They are pleased when you give them something from it, but if they receive nothing, they become angry with you
9|59|Would that they had been pleased with what God and His Messenger had given them and had said, "God is All-Sufficient for us. God and His Messenger will soon do us more favors and we have hope in God's mercy
9|60|Welfare funds (zakat) are only for the poor, the destitute, the tax collectors, those whose hearts are inclined (towards Islam), the slaves, those who cannot pay their debts, for the cause of God, and for those who have become needy on a journey. Paying zakat is an obligation that God has decreed. God is All-knowing and All-wise
9|61|Some of them speak ill of the Prophet, saying, "He listens to everything and believes what he hears." (Muhammad), tell them, "He only listens to what is good for you, believes in God, and has trust in the believers. He is a mercy for the believers among you. Those who speak ill of the Messenger of God will face a painful punishment
9|62|They (hypocrites) swear by God in their effort to please you, but if they were true believers (they would know) that God and His Messenger deserve more to be pleased than anyone else
9|63|Do they not know that for displeasing God and His Messenger, one would be admitted to Hell wherein he would live forever. This indeed is a great humiliation
9|64|The hypocrites are afraid that some revelation will be revealed, thus, making public what is in their hearts. (Muhammad), tell them, "Continue in your mockery; God will certainly let whatever causes you worry to take place
9|65|If you question them about their manners, they say, "We were only arguing for the sake of amusement." Ask them, "Were you mocking God, His revelations, and His Messenger
9|66|Make no excuses. You have certainly turned back to disbelief. If We forgive one group of you, We must punish the other for they are guilty
9|67|Be they male or female hypocrites, they are the same. They make others commit sins, prevent them from doing good deeds, and restrain their hands (from spending for the cause of God). They have forgotten all about God who also has ignored them. The hypocrites indeed are evil-doers
9|68|For the hypocrites and the unbelievers, God has prepared hell wherein they will live forever. Hell is their proper punishment. God has condemned them and they will suffer a permanent torment
9|69|like that of those who lived before you, whose power, wealth, and children were much greater than yours. They enjoyed their share of the worldly gains and you, also, like them, have enjoyed yours. You have been sneaking among the people to cause trouble, just as they had been doing before you. Such people's deeds are devoid of all virtue both in this life and in the life hereafter. They indeed are lost
9|70|Have they not heard the stories of the people of Noah, the tribe of Ad, Thamud, the people of Abraham, the dwellers of the city of Midian, and those of the Subverted Cities? God's Messengers came to each of them with miracles. God did not do any injustice to them, but they wronged themselves
9|71|The believers, both male and female, are each other's guardians. They try to make others do good, prevent them from committing sins, perform their prayers, pay the religious tax, and obey God and His Messenger. God will have mercy on them; He is Majestic and All-wise
9|72|God has promised the believers gardens wherein streams flow and wherein they will live forever in the excellent mansions of the garden of Eden. What is more important than all this for them is that God is pleased with them. Such is the supreme triumph
9|73|Prophet, fight the unbelievers and hypocrites vehemently for the cause of God. Their dwelling is hell, a terrible destination
9|74|They (the hypocrites) swear by the Name of God (to make others believe in what they are saying). They have spoken the testimony of disbelief and have then turned back to disbelief. They have made unsuccessful attempts to cause trouble. There is no other reason for their ungratefulness except that God and His Messenger enriched them through their favors. If they repent, it will be better for them, but if they turn away (from the faith), God will make them suffer a painful punishment both in this life and in the life hereafter. They will find no guardian nor any helper in the land
9|75|Some of them have promised God that if He will favor them, they will certainly spend for His cause and be righteous ones
9|76|But when His favors were bestowed on them, they became niggardly and in disregard broke their promise
9|77|God will, for their disregard of their promise and their telling lies, place hypocrisy in their hearts which will not leave them until they face the consequences of their deeds
9|78|Were they not aware that God knows all that they hide or whisper and that He has absolute knowledge of the unseen
9|79|God mocks those (hypocrites) who blame and mock the rich or poor believers who donate to the welfare funds, and He has prepared a painful torment for them
9|80|(Muhammad), whether you ask God to forgive them or not, He will never do so, even if you were to beg seventy times; they have disbelieved in God and His Messenger and God does not guide the evil-doers
9|81|Those who did not take part in the battle (of Tabuk), were glad about their staying home against the order of the Messenger of God. They did not want to fight for the cause of God with their property and in person and said, "Do not march (to the battle) on the hot days." (Muhammad), tell them, "The heat of hell fire is much more severe, if only you would understand
9|82|They should laugh less and weep more as a recompense for what they have gained
9|83|When God brings you back safely and a group of hypocrites ask you to make them exempt from taking part in the battle, tell them, "Never march with me and never fight with us against any of the enemies (of God). You chose to linger behind the first time, so this time stay behind with those who are of no help in the battle
9|84|Should any of them die, never pray for him or stand on his grave. They have disbelieved in God and His Messenger and have died while committing evil
9|85|Their wealth or children should not tempt you; God wants to punish them through these things in this life so that they will die as disbelievers
9|86|When a chapter of the Quran is revealed telling them to believe in God and fight along with His Messenger for His cause against His enemies, the healthy and rich ones of them ask you to exempt them from taking part in the battle for the cause of God and to let them stay home with the people who are of no help in the battle
9|87|They are happy to stay home with those who are of no help in the battle, thus, their hearts were sealed and they were left with no understanding
9|88|But the Messenger of God and the believers with him fought for the cause of God with their possessions and in person and their reward will be all good things and everlasting happiness
9|89|God has established gardens for them wherein streams flow and wherein they will live forever. This indeed is the greatest triumph
9|90|Some of the dwellers of the desert (who were not able to join the army) came to the Prophet seeking exemption from taking part in the battle. Those who called God and His Messengers liars also stayed home (with those who were truly exempt). The disbelievers will soon receive a painful punishment
9|91|People who are weak or sick and those who do not have the means to take part in the fighting are exempt from this duty if their intention remains sincere about God and His Messenger. Righteous people shall not be blamed. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
9|92|Those who come to you, (Muhammad), asking to be taken to the battle, but you cannot find the necessary means for them, are exempt from the duty of fighting for the cause of God, even though they leave you with their eyes flooded with tears because of not being able to help the cause of God
9|93|The blameworthy ones are those who ask for exemption despite their ability and who preferred to stay at home with those who are truly exempt. God has placed a seal on their hearts but they do not know
9|94|They will apologize to you on your return. Tell them, "Do not ask for pardon. We will never believe you. God has already told us everything about you. God and His Messenger will soon make your deeds public, then you will return to Him who has absolute knowledge of the unseen and the seen and He will inform you of what you have done
9|95|When you return they will appeal to you in the Name of God to leave them alone. So leave them alone. They are filthy and their dwelling will be hell as a recompense for what they had gained
9|96|They swear in the Name of God to please you. Even if you were to be pleased with them, God is not pleased with evil-doing people
9|97|The desert dwelling Arabs are far worse than the others in their disbelief and hypocrisy and have more reason to be ignorant of the revelations that God revealed to His Messenger. God is All-knowing and All-wise
9|98|Whatever some of the desert dwelling Arabs spend for the cause of God, they consider it a loss to themselves. They wish to see you in trouble. Trouble has struck them already. God is All-hearing and All-knowing
9|99|Some of the desert dwelling Arabs believe in God and the Day of Judgment. Whatever they spend for the cause of God they consider it as a means of getting nearer to God and have the prayers of the Messenger in their favor. This, certainly is a means to get nearer to God. God will admit them into His mercy. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
9|100|God is well pleased with the foremost ones of those who left their homes for the cause of God, those who helped them after their arrival in Medina and those who nobly followed these two groups. He has prepared gardens for them wherein streams flow and wherein they will live forever. This, certainly is the supreme triumph
9|101|Some of the desert dwelling Arabs around you are hypocrites as are some of the inhabitants of Medina. They are persisting in their hypocrisies. You do not know them but We know them well and will punish them twice over. Then they will be brought to the great torment (on the Day of Judgment)
9|102|Some of them have already confessed their sins and have mixed virtuous deeds with sinful ones. Perhaps God will forgive them. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
9|103|Collect religious tax (zakat) from them to purify and cleanse them and pray for them; your prayers give them comfort. God is All-hearing and All-knowing
9|104|Do they not know that it is God who accepts the repentance of His servants and receives the welfare funds and that it is God who is All-forgiving and All-merciful
9|105|(Muhammad), tell them, "Act as you wish. God, His Messenger and the believers will see your deeds. You will be brought before the One who has absolute knowledge of the unseen and the seen. He will let you know about all that you have done
9|106|Besides those who have confessed their sins, there are others who have no good deeds for which they may receive any reward or sins for which they may be punished. Their fate will be in the hands of God." God is All-knowing and All-wise
9|107|The mosque which some of the hypocrites have established is only to harm people, to spread disbelief, to create discord among the believers, to wait for the one who fought against God and His Messenger, and to make others believe that it has been established with their good intentions. But God testifies that they are liars
9|108|(Muhammad), never stay in that mosque. The mosque which was established for a pious purpose and before all other mosques is more virtuous for your prayer. In this mosque, there are people who love to be purified. God loves those who purify themselves
9|109|Which is better, the mosque that is founded for pious purposes and for achieving God's pleasure or that which is based on the brink of a crumbling bank and which may crumble into hell at any moment? God does not guide the unjust
9|110|The building (mosque) which they have built always motivates mischief in their hearts until their hearts are cut into pieces. God is All-knowing and All-wise
9|111|God has purchased the souls and property of the believers in exchange for Paradise. They fight for the cause of God to destroy His enemies and to sacrifice themselves. This is a true promise which He has revealed in the Torah, the Gospel, and the Quran. No one is more true to His promise than God. Let this bargain be glad news for them. This is indeed the supreme triumph
9|112|(The believers) who repent for their sins, worship God, praise Him, travel through the land (for pious purposes), kneel down and prostrate themselves in obedience to God, make others do good and prevent them from sins and abide by the laws of God, will receive a great reward. Let this be glad news for the believer
9|113|After it was made clear that the pagans are to be the dwellers of hell, the Prophet and the believers should not have sought forgiveness from God for them even though they may have been relatives
9|114|There was no other reason for Abraham to seek forgiveness from God for his father except the promise that he had made with him. When Abraham knew that his father was an enemy of God, he disowned his father. Abraham was very tender-hearted and forbearing
9|115|God does not misguide a nation after having given them guidance until the means of piety are made known to them. God knows all things
9|116|To God belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He grants life and causes death. God is your only Guardian and Helper
9|117|God pardoned the Prophet, the Emigrants, the Helpers, and those who followed them, when the hearts of some of them almost deviated (from the truth) in their hour of difficulty. God forgave them because of His Compassion and Mercy
9|118|God also forgave the three people who lagged behind. Grief made them feel as though there was no place in the whole vast earth to hide them or in their souls to conceal their sorrow. They began to believe that no one could save them from (the wrath of God) except He Himself. God pardoned them so that they would also repent for their sins. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
9|119|Believers, have fear of God and always be friends with the truthful ones
9|120|The inhabitants of the city of Medina and the desert Arabs dwelling around it were not supposed to disobey the Messenger of God or to give priority to their own lives above that of the Prophet. For if they had given priority to the life of the Messenger of God, they would not have experienced the hardships of thirst, fatigue, or hunger in their struggle for the cause of God, nor would their travelling have enraged the disbelievers and they would not have received any injury from enemies that God would not record for them as a virtuous deed. God does not ignore the reward of those who do good
9|121|Also, they would not have spent anything, great or small, for the cause of God or travel through a valley without God decreeing a reward for them far better than whatever they had done
9|122|Not all believers have to become specialists in religious learning. Why do not some people from each group of believers seek to become specialists in religious learning and, after completing their studies, guide their group so that they will have fear of God
9|123|Believers, fight the unbelievers near you for the cause of God so that they realize your strength and know that God is with the pious ones
9|124|When a chapter (of the Quran) is revealed, some people ask others, "Whose faith among you people has received strength from this (revelation)?" It (the revelation) certainly strengthens the faith of the believers and they consider it to be a glad news
9|125|But to those whose hearts are sick, it adds more filth to their hearts and they die as disbelievers
9|126|Do they not realize that God tests them once or twice a year but, nevertheless, they do not repent and give it proper thought
9|127|When a chapter (of the Quran) is revealed, (it upsets them). They look at one another and their eyes silently ask this question, "Has any one noticed the disappointment on our faces?" Then they walk away. In fact, God has turned their hearts away (from the truth); they are a people who have no understanding
9|128|A Messenger from your own people has come to you. Your destruction and suffering is extremely grievous to him. He really cares about you and is very compassionate and merciful to the believers
9|129|(Muhammad), if they turn away from you, say, "God is Sufficient (support) for me. There is no God but He. In Him do I trust and He is the Owner of the Great Throne
10|1|Alif. Lam. Ra. These are the verses of the Book of wisdom
10|2|Why should it seem strange to mankind that We sent revelations to a mortal among them, who would warn others and give to the believers the glad news of their high rank in the sight of God. The unbelievers have said, "He (Muhammad) is certainly a magician
10|3|God is your Lord who has created the heavens and the earth in six days and established His Dominion over the Throne. He maintains order over the creation. No one can intercede for others without His permission. It is God who is your only Lord. Worship only Him. Will you then not think
10|4|People, you will all return to God. The promise of God is true; He creates all things and (after their death) brings them to life again so that He may justly reward the righteously striving believers. The disbelievers will drink boiling filthy water and suffer painful torment as a recompense for their disbelief
10|5|It is God who has made the sun radiant and the moon luminous and has appointed for the moon certain phases so that you may compute the number of years and other reckonings. God has created them for a genuine purpose. He explains the evidence (of His existence) to the people of knowledge
10|6|The alternation of the day and night and all that God has created in the heavens and earth are evidence (of the existence of God) for the pious people
10|7|Those who do not have hope of receiving Our mercy in the life hereafter who are pleased and satisfied with the worldly life and who pay no attention to Our revelations
10|8|will all have the Fire as their dwelling for that which they had done
10|9|The righteously striving believers receive, through their faith, guidance from their Lord to the bountiful gardens wherein streams flow
10|10|Their prayer shall be, "Glory be to you Lord," and their greeting, "Peace be with you," and the only other words (of worldly speech) they will speak will be, "It is God, Lord of the Universe, who deserves all praise
10|11|Had God been as hasty to punish people as they were hasty to achieve good, their life would have already ended. We will leave those who have no hope of receiving Our mercy, in the life hereafter, to continue blindly in their transgression
10|12|When the human being is affected by hardship, he starts to pray while lying on his side, sitting or standing, but when We relieve him from hardship, he starts to act as though he had never prayed to Us to save him from the misfortune. This is how transgressors' deeds are made attractive to them
10|13|We destroyed certain generations who lived before you because of their injustice. Our Messengers came to them and showed them miracles, but they would not believe. Thus do We punish the criminals
10|14|We have made you their successors in the land so that We could see how you behaved
10|15|Whenever Our authoritative revelations are recited to those who do not wish to meet Us in the life hereafter, say, "Bring us another book besides this one or change it." (Muhammad), tell them, "I can not change it myself. I only follow what is revealed to me. I fear that for disobeying my Lord I shall be punished on the great (Day of Judgment)
10|16|(Muhammad), tell them, "Had God wanted I would not have recited it (the Book) to you nor would I have told you anything about it. I lived among you for a whole life-time before it was revealed. Will you then not understand
10|17|Who is more unjust than one who invents falsehood against God or calls His revelations lies? The criminals will certainly have no happiness
10|18|(Some people) worship things other than God which harm nor benefit them. They say, "These (idols) are our intercessors before God." (Muhammad), tell them, "Are you trying to tell God about something that He does not find in the heavens or earth? God is too Glorious to be considered equal to idols
10|19|All people (once) followed one belief. Then they began to follow different beliefs. Had not a word of your Lord (His decision to give every one time and free will) been decreed, God would already have settled their differences
10|20|They (unbelievers) say, "Why has his Lord not given him some miracles to (support his claim of being His Messenger)?" Say "(The knowledge) of the unseen certainly belongs to God. Wait and I too shall be waiting with you
10|21|When people are granted mercy after having suffered hardship, they begin to plot against Our revelations. Say, "God is the most swift in His plans." Our angelic messengers record all that you plot
10|22|When you are rejoicing in a boat, a favorable breeze and a violent storm arises with waves surrounding you from all sides. Thinking that you will not survive, you start to pray sincerely to God. In prayer, you say, "If You rescue us from this we shall certainly be grateful
10|23|When We saved you, you started to rebel unjustly in the land. People, your rebellion will only harm yourselves. You may enjoy the worldly life but to Us you will all return and We will let you know all that you had done
10|24|The example of the worldly life is like the water sent down from the sky which becomes mixed with the earth's produce that people and cattle consume. When the land becomes fertile and pleasant, people think that they have control over it. At Our command during the night or day, the land becomes as barren as if it had no richness the day before. Thus, do We explain the evidence (of the truth) for the people who reflect
10|25|God invites every one to the House of Peace and guides whomever He wants to the right path
10|26|The righteous will receive good reward for their deeds and more. Their faces will suffer no disgrace or ignominy. They will be the dwellers of Paradise wherein they will live forever
10|27|The recompense for the evil deeds will be equally evil (not more) and the faces of the evil-doers will suffer from disgrace. No one can protect them from the wrath of God. Their faces will become dark as if covered by the pitch-darkness of night. They will be the dwellers of hell wherein they will remain forever
10|28|We will tell the pagans on the day when every one is resurrected, "Stand with your idols wherever you are." Then We will separate them (from their idols) and their idols will protest against them saying, "You did not worship us
10|29|God is Sufficient Witness for us that we were not aware of your worship
10|30|There every soul will experience the result of all that it had done. They will be brought into the presence of God, their true Lord, and all that they falsely invented will vanish
10|31|(Muhammad), ask them, "Who gives you sustenance from the heavens and earth, who truly possesses (your) hearing and seeing abilities, who brings the living out of the dead and the dead out of the living and who regulates (the whole Universe)? They will reply, "God." Ask them, "Why, then, do you not have fear of Him
10|32|Thus is God your true Lord. In the absence of truth there is nothing but falsehood. Then where are you turning
10|33|The decree of your Lord that the evil-doers will not have faith has already been issued
10|34|(Muhammad), ask them,"Can any of your idols create something (cause it to die), and then bring it back to life again?" Say, "Only God can originate the creation and bring it to life again. Where have you strayed
10|35|(Muhammad), ask them, "Can any of your idols guide you to the Truth?" Say, "Only God guides to the Truth." Is the one who guides to the Truth a proper guide or one who himself cannot find guidance unless he is guided (by others)? What is wrong with you that you judge (so unjustly)
10|36|Most of the unbelievers follow only conjecture which certainly cannot serve as a substitute for the Truth. God knows well what they do
10|37|No one could have composed this Quran besides God. This confirms the existing Book (the Bible) and explains itself. There is no doubt that it is from the Lord of the Universe
10|38|Do they say that Muhammad has invented it? (Muhammad), tell them, "If your claim is true, compose only one chapter like it and call on anyone besides God for help
10|39|They call a lie something that is beyond the limit of their knowledge and whose interpretation has not yet been revealed. Some people who lived before them also called Our revelations lies. Consider how terrible was the end of the unjust people
10|40|Some of them believe in the Quran and others do not. Your Lord knows best the evil doers
10|41|If they call you a liar, tell them, "Let each one of us follow his own way. You will not be responsible for what I do and I will not be responsible for what you do
10|42|Some of them will listen to you, but are you supposed to make the deaf hear even if they have no understanding
10|43|Some of them will look at you, but are you supposed to guide the blind even if they have no vision
10|44|God does not do the least bit of injustice to anyone but people wrong themselves
10|45|On the day when they will be resurrected, their worldly life will seem to them only as an hour of a day and they all will recognize each other. Those who called the receiving of mercy from God a lie are certainly lost. They did not have the right guidance
10|46|When if We show you them suffering Our retribution or you die before their suffering, (they will not be able to escape Our punishment) they will all return to Us. God bears witness to whatever they do
10|47|A Messenger is appointed for all people. When the Messenger for them came he judged among them fairly and they were not wronged
10|48|They ask, "If you (believers) speak the truth, when will your promise (about the Day of Judgment) be fulfilled
10|49|(Muhammad), tell them, "I have no control over my suffering or benefits unless God wills. Every nation is destined to live for an appointed time. They can neither delay that time nor can they cause it to come sooner
10|50|Ask them, "What benefit can criminals get from their demand that God must punish them immediately if His words are true?" Whether His punishment befalls them during the day or night (they will not be able to escape)
10|51|Besides, if He was to send them the punishment which they want to quickly experience, would they then have faith
10|52|The unjust will be told, "Suffer the everlasting torment. Do you expect a recompense other than what you deserve
10|53|They ask you, "Is that (punishment) true?" Tell them, "It certainly is. I swear by my Lord. You can not escape from (God's retribution)
10|54|(On the Day of Judgment) to redeem oneself of one's injustice, one would gladly spend the wealth of the whole earth if it were possible. On seeing the torment one will try to hide his regret. They will all be judged fairly and no wrong will be done to them
10|55|All that is in the heavens and the earth certainly belongs to God and His promise is true, but many people do not know this
10|56|It is God who gives life and causes things to die. To Him you will all return
10|57|People, good advice has come to you from your Lord a (spiritual) cure, a guide and a mercy for the believers
10|58|(Muhammad), tell them, "To be happy with the favors and mercy of God is better than whatever you accumulate
10|59|Ask them, "Have you considered that out of the sustenance which God has given you, you made some of it lawful and some unlawful? Did God permit you to do this or are you ascribing falsehood to Him
10|60|What do those who ascribe falsehood to God think of the Day of Judgment? God is generous to the human being, yet many do not give thanks
10|61|(Muhammad), We bear witness to all your affairs; whatever you recite from the Quran and whatever you (people) do. Nothing in the heavens or the earth is hidden from your Lord, even that which is as small as an atom's weight or greater or smaller. All is recorded in the glorious Book
10|62|The friends of God will certainly have nothing to fear, nor will they be grieved
10|63|Those who have faith and fear God
10|64|will receive glad news both in this life and in the life hereafter. The words of God do not change. This alone is the supreme triumph
10|65|(Muhammad), let not their words disappoint you; all dignity belongs to God. He is All-hearing and All-knowing
10|66|Does not all that is in the heavens and the earth belong to God? (The unbelievers) who worship the idols instead of God follow only conjecture. What they preach are mere lies
10|67|It is God who has made the night for you to rest and has filled the day with light (as a means of visibility). In this there is evidence (of the existence of God) for the people who hear
10|68|Some people have said that God has begotten a son. God is too Glorious to have a son! God is Self-sufficient and to Him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. In this, you (people) have no authority. Do you ascribe to God things of which you have no knowledge
10|69|(Muhammad), tell them, "Those who invent falsehood against God will have no happiness
10|70|They may consider it a means of enjoyment in this life but (on the Day of Judgment) they will all return to Us. Then they will suffer for their disbelief the most severe punishment
10|71|(Muhammad), tell them the story of Noah who told his people, "Even if my belief and my preaching of the revelation of God seem strange to you, I put my trust in Him. Unite yourselves and seek help from your idols. You should not regret what you want to do, but should execute your plans against me without delay
10|72|If you turn away from my preaching, it will not harm me; I shall receive my reward from God who has commanded me to become a Muslim
10|73|They rejected Noah. Then We saved him and his people in the Ark to make them the successors of the rest. The others, who had called Our revelations lies, were drowned. Consider the fate of those who (rejected) Our warnings
10|74|After (Noah) We sent other Messengers to their people with clear authoritative evidence proving their prophetic claims). But how could the people believe what they had previously called lies? Thus do We seal the hearts of the transgressors
10|75|Then We sent Moses and Aaron with Our miracles to the Pharaoh and his people. These people also proved to be arrogant. They were wicked people
10|76|When the Truth from Us came, they called it simply magic
10|77|Moses asked, "Why do you call the Truth which has come to you magic? Magicians, certainly, will not have happiness
10|78|They asked Moses, "Have you come to turn us away from the faith of our fathers and to make yourselves the rulers in the land? We shall never accept your faith
10|79|The Pharaoh ordered every skillful magician to come into his presence
10|80|When all the magicians were brought to his court, Moses asked them to cast down what they wanted to
10|81|When the magicians had thrown theirs, Moses said, "What you have performed is magic. God will certainly prove it to be false; He will not make the deeds of the corrupt people righteous
10|82|God will make the Truth stand supreme by His words, even though the wicked people dislike it
10|83|No one believed in Moses except some young people of his own tribe who were at the same time very afraid of the persecution of the Pharaoh and his people. The Pharaoh was certainly a tyrant and a transgressor
10|84|Moses told his people, "If you have submitted yourselves to God and have faith in Him, put your trust in Him
10|85|They said, "In God do we trust. Lord, do not subject us to the persecution of the unjust ones
10|86|Lord, save us, through Your mercy, from the disbelieving people
10|87|We sent a revelation to Moses and his brother to build houses for their people in the Pharaoh's town and to build them facing one another. (We told him) that therein they should pray and that Moses should give the glad news (of God's mercy) to the faithful ones
10|88|Moses said, "Lord, You have given the Pharaoh and his people great riches and splendor in this life and this makes them stray from Your path. Lord, destroy their wealth and harden their hearts in disbelief so that they will suffer the most painful torment
10|89|The Lord replied, "Moses, the prayer of your brother and yourself has been heard. Both of you must be steadfast (in your faith) and must not follow the ignorant ones
10|90|We helped the children of Israel cross the sea safely. The Pharaoh and his army pursued the children of Israel with wickedness and hate until the Pharaoh was drowned. As he was drowning the Pharaoh said, "I declare that there is no God but the One in whom the children of Israel believe and I have submitted to the Word of God
10|91|(God replied), "Now you declare belief in Me! but before this you were a disobedient rebel
10|92|We will save your body on this day so that you may become evidence (of Our existence) for the coming generations; many people are unaware of such evidence
10|93|We settled the children of Israel in a blessed land and provided them with pure sustenance. They did not create differences among themselves until after the knowledge had come to them. God will judge their differences on the Day of Judgment
10|94|If you (people) have any doubt about what We have revealed to you (about the Day of Judgment and other matters of belief), ask those who read the Book that was revealed (to the Prophets who lived) before you. The truth has certainly come to you from your Lord. Thus, do not doubt it (in your heart)
10|95|nor be of those who have called God's revelations lies lest you become lost
10|96|(Even though all kinds of miracles will be shown to them) those about whom the word of your Lord has been ordained, will not have faith
10|97|until they face the most painful torment
10|98|Why did no one except the people of Jonah believe (in their punishment before their death) so that they could have benefitted from their faith? When the people of Jonah believed, We saved them from a disgraceful torment in this life and provided them with the means of enjoyment for an appointed time
10|99|Had your Lord wished, the whole of mankind would have believed in Him. (Muhammad), do you force people to have faith
10|100|No one can have faith without the permission of God. God will cast down filth on those who have no understanding
10|101|(Muhammad), tell them to consider that which is in the heavens and the earth. Evidence and warnings are of no avail to the disbelieving people
10|102|What can they expect other than the kind of (punishment that befell the disbelieving people) who had gone before them? (Muhammad), tell them, "Wait and I too will be waiting with you
10|103|We saved Our Messengers and those who believed; We must save the believers
10|104|(Muhammad), say, "People, if you have doubt about my religion, know that I, certainly, do not worship the idols which you worship instead of God, but I worship God who causes you to die. I am commanded to believe (in His existence)
10|105|to have firm belief in the up-right religion and not to be an idolater
10|106|nor to seek help from anyone other than God [who can neither benefit nor harm me], lest I become of the unjust
10|107|(Muhammad), if God afflicts you with hardship, no one besides Him can save you. If God grants you a favor, no one can prevent you from receiving His favors. God bestows His favors upon whichever of His servants He wants. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
10|108|(Muhammad), say, "People, truth has certainly come to you from your Lord. One who seeks guidance does so for his own good and One who goes astray will find himself lost. I am not your keeper
10|109|(Muhammad), follow what is revealed to you and have patience until God issues His Judgment; He is the best Judge
11|1|Alif. Lam. Ra. This is a Book from One who is All-wise and All-aware. Its verses are well composed and distinctly arranged (from one another)
11|2|(It teaches), "People, do not worship anyone besides God. I, (Muhammad), am His Messenger sent to warn you and to give you the glad news
11|3|Seek forgiveness from your Lord and turn to Him in repentance for your sins. He will provide you good sustenance for an appointed time and will reward everyone according to his merits. I am afraid that you will suffer torment on the great Day (of Judgment) if you turn away (from God)
11|4|To God you will all return. God has power over all things
11|5|(The unbelievers) cover their breasts to try to hide their disbelief from God. But He knows very well whatever they conceal or reveal even when they cover themselves with their garments. God certainly knows the inner-most (secrets) of the hearts
11|6|There is no living creature on earth that does not receive sustenance from God. He knows its dwelling and resting place. Everything is recorded in the glorious Book
11|7|God created the heavens and the earth in six days. His Throne existed on water so that He could test you and find out those among you who do good deeds. (Muhammad), if you were to tell them that after death they would be brought back to life again, the unbelievers would say, "This is nothing but obvious magic
11|8|If We delay in afflicting them with Our punishment for an appointed time, they ask, "What is preventing it (the punishment) from taking place?" On the day when it (punishment) befalls them, no one will be able to escape from it and that which they have mocked will surround them from all sides
11|9|We grant a favor to the human being and then take it away from him. He becomes despairing and ungrateful
11|10|If after his hardship, We grant him a blessing, he grows proud and rejoicing and says, "All my hardships have gone
11|11|But those who exercise patience and do good works do not behave as such. They will receive forgiveness and a great reward (from the Lord)
11|12|Perhaps you, (Muhammad), may by chance leave (untold) a part of that which is revealed to you and feel grieved because they say, "Why has some treasure not been sent to him or an angel sent down with him?" Say, "I have come only to warn you." God is the Guardian of all things
11|13|Do they, (the unbelievers), say that (Muhammad) has falsely ascribed (the Quran) to God? Ask them, "Compose ten chapters like (those of the Quran) and call on whomever you can for help besides God if you are true in your claim
11|14|If they will not respond to you, know that God has sent it with His knowledge and that He is the only God. Will you then become Muslims
11|15|Those who choose the worldly life and its pleasures will be given proper recompense for their deeds in this life and will not suffer any loss
11|16|Such people will receive nothing in the next life except Hell fire. Their deeds will be made devoid of all virtue and their efforts will be in vain
11|17|Should they be compared with those whose Lord has given them a guidance which is testified by a witness from among their own people and by the Book of Moses, a guide and a mercy. Such people do believe in this guidance (in the Quran). Those who disbelieve (in the Quran) will have hell as their dwelling place. Thus, (Muhammad), have no doubt about it (the Quran). It is certainly the truth from your Lord, yet many people do not have faith
11|18|Who are more unjust than those who ascribe falsehood to God? When such people are brought into the presence of their Lord, the witness will say, "These are the ones who told lies about their Lord. Certainly God will condemn the unjust
11|19|who prevent others from the way of God, seek to make it appear crooked, and who have no faith in the life hereafter
11|20|Such people will never weaken God's (power) on earth nor will they find any guardian besides God. Their punishment will be doubled and they will not be able to hear or see
11|21|They have lost their souls and their false deities will turn away from them
11|22|In the life to come they will certainly lose a great deal
11|23|The righteously striving believers who are humble before their Lord, will be the dwellers of Paradise wherein they will live forever
11|24|Can the two groups, the blind and the deaf, be considered equal to those who have vision and hearing? Will you then not take heed
11|25|We sent Noah to his people to give them the clear warning
11|26|that they should not worship anyone besides God. (Noah warned them), "I am afraid that you will suffer the most painful torment
11|27|The disbelievers among his people said, "We do not believe that you are any better than the rest of us; we see that only the worthless hasty ones, the lowliest among us follow you. Thus, we do not think that you are superior to us, rather you are all liars
11|28|Noah replied, "My people do you think - that if my Lord has sent me a miracle and granted me mercy but your ignorance has obscured them from your sight - we can force you to believe when you do not want to
11|29|My people I do not ask any payment for what I preach to you. No one except God has to give me any reward. I do not drive away those who have faith (in my teaching); they will all receive mercy from their Lord. I know that you are ignorant people
11|30|My people, who would protect me against God if I were to drive these people away? Will you then not take heed
11|31|I do not say that God's treasures belong to me, that I know the unseen, or that I am an angel. Nor do I say about those whom you disdain that God will not give them any reward. God knows best what is in their hearts, for then I would be unjust
11|32|They said, "Noah, you have argued with us a great deal. Bring down on us whatever torment with which you have been threatening us if what you say is true
11|33|(Noah) replied, "God will bring torment down on you whenever He wants and you will not be able to make His (plans) fail
11|34|My advice will be of no benefit to you if God wants to let you go astray. He is your Lord and to Him you will all return
11|35|Do they say that Muhammad has falsely ascribed (the Quran) to God? (Muhammad), tell them "Had I falsely ascribed it to God, I shall be responsible for my own sins. I am certainly not responsible for whatever sins you commit
11|36|It was revealed to Noah that besides those who had already accepted his faith, no one from his people would ever believe him. He was told not to be disappointed about what his people had done
11|37|but to build the Ark under the supervision and guidance of his Lord. He was also told not to address any words to Him concerning the unjust for they were all to be drowned
11|38|(Noah) started to build the Ark but whenever some of his people passed by, they would mock him. He in return would reply, "Mock us, but just as you mock us, we, too, will mock you
11|39|You will soon learn who will face a humiliating punishment and will be encompassed by an everlasting torment
11|40|When at last Our decree was fulfilled, water gushed forth from the Oven (in Noah's house). We told him to carry in the Ark a pair (male and female) from every species, his family - except those who were destined to perish - and the believers. No one believed in him, except a few
11|41|(Noah) said, "Embark in it. It will sail in the name of God, in His Name it will sail and in His Name it will cast anchor. My Lord is All-forgiving and All-merciful
11|42|When the Ark sailed on with them amid the mountainous waves, Noah called out to his son who kept away from them, "My son, embark with us. Do not stay with the unbelievers
11|43|His son replied, "I shall climb up a mountain and this will save me from the flood." Noah said, "No one can escape on this day from God's command except those on whom He has mercy." The waves separated Noah from his son who was then drowned with the rest (of the unbelievers)
11|44|Then the earth was told to swallow-up its water and the sky was ordered to stop raining. The water abated and God's command had been fulfilled. The Ark came to rest on Mount Judi. A voice said, "The unjust people are far away from the mercy of God
11|45|Noah prayed to his Lord saying, "Lord, my son is a member of my family. Your promise is always true and you are the best Judge
11|46|His Lord replied, "He is not one of your family. He is a man of unrighteous deeds. Do not ask me about that which you have no knowledge. I advise you not to become an ignorant person
11|47|Noah said, "Lord, I ask You to prevent me from asking You ignorant questions and beg you for pardon and mercy or else I shall certainly be lost
11|48|Noah was told, "Get down from the Ark. Your Lord's peace and blessings are upon you and your followers. Your Lord will grant favors to other nations and then afflict them with a painful torment
11|49|That which We have revealed to you (Muhammad) is news of the unseen. This was not known to you and to your people. Have patience. The pious will triumph in the end
11|50|To the tribe of Ad We sent their brother Hud who told them, "Worship God; He is your only Lord. The idols that you worship are plainly false
11|51|My people, I do not ask any reward for what I have preached to you. No one can give me my reward except my Creator. Will you then not take heed
11|52|My people, seek forgiveness from your Lord and turn to Him in repentance. He will send you abundant rain from the sky and will increase your power. Do not sinfully turn away from Him
11|53|They said, "Hud, you have not shown us any miracles. We shall not give up our idols because of what you say and we shall not have any faith in you
11|54|We believe that some of our gods have afflicted you with evil." Hud said, "God is my witness and so are you that I have no association
11|55|with the idols that you worship besides God. So plan against me without delay
11|56|I trust God who is my Lord as well as yours. It is God who controls the destiny of all living creatures. It is my Lord who knows the right path
11|57|If you turn away from Him (since I have already preached to you the message that I carry), He will replace you with another nation. You cannot harm Him the least. My Lord is the Protector of all things
11|58|When Our decree (of destroying them) was fulfilled, We mercifully saved Hud and his believing followers. We saved them from the intense torment
11|59|It was the tribe of `Ad who denied the miracles of their Lord, disobeyed His Messenger and followed the orders of every transgressing tyrant
11|60|They were condemned in this life and will be condemned in the life hereafter. The tribe of Ad had certainly rejected their Lord. God kept the tribe of Ad, the people of Hud, away from His mercy
11|61|To Thamud We sent their brother Salih who told them, "My people, worship God; He is your only Lord. It is He who has created you from the earth and has settled you therein. Seek forgiveness from Him and turn to Him in repentance. My Lord is certainly close to everyone and He hears all prayers
11|62|They said, "Salih, we had great hope in you before this. Do you forbid us to worship that which our fathers had worshipped? We are doubtful and uncertain about what you have told us to worship
11|63|He said, "My people, think. I have received authoritative evidence and mercy from my Lord, so who will protect me from God if I disobey Him? You certainly want to destroy me
11|64|My people, this is the she-camel of God, a miracle (to support the truth which has been brought) to you. Leave her to graze in the land of God. Do not harm her with your evil deeds lest torment will suddenly strike you
11|65|When they slew the she-camel, Salih told them, "You have only three days to enjoy living in your homes (before you will be struck by the torment). This is an inevitable prophecy
11|66|When Our decree came to pass. We mercifully saved Salih and his faithful followers from that day's ignominy. Your Lord is certainly Mighty and Majestic
11|67|A blast struck the unjust and they were found lying motionless on their faces
11|68|as though they had never existed. The people of Thamud denied the existence of their Lord. How distant from the mercy of God had the people of Thamud gone
11|69|Our Messengers came to Abraham with glad news. They said, "Peace be with you." He replied similarly. After a short time he presented them with a roasted calf
11|70|but when he saw that their hands did not reach out for it, he could not know who they were and became afraid of them. They said, "Do not be afraid; we are God's angelic Messengers sent to the people of Lot
11|71|His wife who was standing nearby, smiled and so We gave her the glad news that she would give birth to Isaac who would have a son, Jacob
11|72|She said, "Woe is me! How can I have a baby when I am barren and my husband is very old? This is certainly strange
11|73|They replied, "Would you be surprised at God's decree? People of the house, may God's mercy and blessings be with you. God is Appreciative and Glorious
11|74|When Abraham had controlled his fear and received the glad news, he started to plead with Us for the people of Lot
11|75|Abraham was certainly a forbearing, compassionate, and tender-hearted person
11|76|We said, "Abraham, avoid asking Us such questions. Your Lord's decree has already been issued and an inevitable torment will strike these people
11|77|When Our Messengers came to Lot, he became sorrowful and felt totally helpless. He said, "This is indeed a distressful day
11|78|His people, who had constantly indulged in evil deeds, came running to him. He said, "My people, here are my pure daughters. Have fear of God and do not humiliate me before my guests. Is there no person of understanding among you
11|79|They said, "You certainly know that we have no right to your daughters and you know what we want
11|80|He said, "Would that I had the power (to overcome you) or could seek strong protection
11|81|Our Messengers said, "Lot, we are the Messengers of your Lord. They will never harm you. Leave the town with your family in the darkness of night and do not let any of you turn back. As for your wife, she will suffer what they (unbelievers) will suffer. Their appointed time will come at dawn. Surely dawn is not far away
11|82|When Our decree came to pass, We turned the town upside-down and showered unto it lumps of baked clay
11|83|marked by your Lord. Such a punishment is not far away from the unjust people
11|84|To the people of Midian We sent their brother Shu'ayb who told them, "My people, worship God; He is your only Lord. Do not be dishonest in your weighing and measuring. I can see you are safe and prosperous, but I am afraid for you of the overwhelming torment of the (appointed) day
11|85|My people, be just in your weighing and measuring. Do not defraud people or spread evil in the land
11|86|If you are true believers then know that the profit which God has left for you is better for you (than what you may gain through deceitful ways). I am not responsible for your deeds
11|87|They asked him, "Shu'ayb, do your prayers tell you that we must give up the worship of what our fathers had worshipped and that we must not deal with our properties as we like? We still believe that you are a person of forbearance and understanding
11|88|He said, "My people, do you not realize that I have received authoritative evidence from my Lord and have been granted a noble gift from Him? I do not want to oppose or ignore what I have prohibited you not to do. I only intend to reform you as much as I can. My success is in the hands of God. I trust Him and turn to Him in repentance
11|89|My people, do not let your opposition to me lead you to commit sins or make you suffer what the people of Noah, Hud, and Salih suffered. Remember that the people of Lot were destroyed not very long ago
11|90|Seek forgiveness from your Lord and turn to Him in repentance. My Lord is certainly All-merciful and Loving
11|91|They said, "Shu'ayb, we do not understand much of what you say, but we know that you are weak among us. Had it not been for our respect of your tribe, we would have stoned you to death; you are not very dear to us
11|92|He asked them, "My people, is my tribe more respectable to you than God whom you have completely ignored? My Lord certainly has full control over your deeds
11|93|My people, do as you wish and I will do (as I believe). You will soon know who will suffer a humiliating torment and who was the one telling lies. Wait and I too will be waiting with you
11|94|When Our decree came to pass, We mercifully saved Shu'ayb and his faithful followers. A blast struck the unjust and left them in their homes, lying motionless on their faces
11|95|as though they had never existed. How far from (the mercy of God) had the people of Midian gone, just as those of Thamud
11|96|We sent Moses to the Pharaoh and his nobles with Our miracles and a clear authority
11|97|They followed the order of the Pharaoh but Pharaoh's orders were evil
11|98|On the Day of Judgment he will lead his people down into the hell fire. His leadership is evil and terrible is the place to which he leads
11|99|They are condemned in this world and in the life to come. Evil is the gift and the recipient
11|100|Such were the stories of the nations of the past which We tell to you, (Muhammad). Some of them were destroyed and some of them have survived
11|101|We were not unjust to them but they were unjust to themselves. The idols which they worshipped instead of God were of no help to them when Our decree came to pass. The idols only brought about their destruction
11|102|Thus was the punishment of your Lord when He punished the unjust people of the towns. The punishment of your Lord is certainly severe
11|103|In this there is, certainly, a lesson for those who fear the torment of the next life in which all people will be gathered together
11|104|during a single day. We have deferred this day for an appointed time
11|105|On the Day of Judgment no one will speak without the permission of God. Some will be condemned and others blessed
11|106|The condemned ones will live in hell fire, sighing and groaning
11|107|for as long as the heavens and the earth exist, unless your Lord decides otherwise. Your Lord will certainly accomplish whatever He wants
11|108|The blessed ones will live in Paradise as long as the heavens and the earth exist, unless your Lord decides to grant endless rewards to whomever He wants
11|109|Have no doubt that these people worship (idols). They worship what their fathers had worshipped before them. We will give them the exact recompense that they deserve
11|110|We gave the Book to Moses but people had different views about it. Had the Word of your Lord not been already ordained, He would have settled their differences (there and then). They are still in doubt about this
11|111|God will certainly recompense everyone according to their deeds; He knows well all that you do
11|112|(Muhammad), be steadfast (in your faith) just as you have been commanded. Those who have turned to God in repentance with you, should also be steadfast in their faith. Do not indulge in rebellion. God is certainly aware of what you do
11|113|Do not be inclined towards the unjust ones lest you will be afflicted by the hell fire. Besides God, no one can be your protector nor will anyone be able to help you
11|114|Say your prayers in the morning, the last portion of the day, and at the beginning of the night. Good deeds do away with the bad deeds. This is a reminder for those who take heed
11|115|Exercise patience; God does not ignore the reward of those who do good
11|116|Why were there no people of understanding among those people of the destroyed towns of the past except for a few, whom we saved from destruction, to prevent people from committing evil in the land? The unjust among them indulged in worldly pleasures and so became guilty
11|117|Your Lord would not have destroyed those people (of the towns) for their injustice if they had tried to reform themselves
11|118|Had your Lord wanted, He would have made all people one united nation. They still have different beliefs
11|119|except those upon whom God has granted His mercy. God has created them to receive mercy. The decree of your Lord that He will fill hell with both jinn and human beings has already been ordained
11|120|(Muhammad), We tell you all the stories of the Messengers which will strengthen your heart. In the Quran We have revealed the Truth to you with good advice and reminders for the faithful ones
11|121|Tell the unbelievers, "Do as you wish and I will do as I believe
11|122|Wait, and I, too, will be waiting with you
11|123|To God belongs the knowledge of the unseen in the heavens and the earth and to Him do all affairs return. Worship Him and trust Him. Your Lord is not unaware of what you do
12|1|Alif. Lam. Ra. These are the verses of the illustrious Book
12|2|We have revealed it in the Arabic language so that you (people) would understand it
12|3|In revealing this Quran to you, We tell you the best of the stories of which you were unaware
12|4|When Joseph said, "Father, in my dream I saw eleven stars, the sun and the moon prostrating before me
12|5|his father said, "My son, do not tell your dream to your brothers lest they plot against you; satan is the sworn enemy of man
12|6|Thus, your Lord will select you, teach you the interpretation of dreams, and grant His favors to you and the family of Jacob, just as He granted His favors to your fathers, Abraham and Isaac. Your Lord is certainly All-knowing and All-wise
12|7|In the story of Joseph and his brothers, there is evidence (of the truth) for those who seek to know
12|8|Joseph's brothers said to one another, "There is no doubt that Joseph and his brother are more loved by our father, even though we are all his offspring. He (our father) is certainly in manifest error
12|9|Some of them suggested, "Let us kill Joseph or leave him somewhere far away from the presence of our father. Only then shall we receive equal treatment and thereafter can become righteous people
12|10|One of them said, "Do not kill Joseph, but if you must, throw him into a dark well so that perhaps some caravan will take him away
12|11|Then they asked their father, "Why do you not trust us with Joseph? We are his well-wishers
12|12|Send him with us tomorrow to play with us and enjoy himself. We shall carefully protect him
12|13|Jacob replied, "I shall be grieved if you take him with you; I fear that some wild-beast will harm him in your absence
12|14|They said, "If some wild-beast would be able to harm him, despite the presence of our strong group, it would certainly be a great loss to us
12|15|When they took Joseph with them, they agreed to throw him into the well. We revealed to Joseph that (sometime) in the future at a time when they would not recognize him, he would remind them of all this
12|16|In the evening they returned to their father weeping
12|17|and saying, "Father, we went playing and left Joseph with our belongings. A wild-beast came and devoured him. We realize that you will not believe us even though we are telling the truth
12|18|They presented him with a shirt stained with false blood. Jacob said, "Your souls have tempted you in this matter. Let us be patient and beg assistance from God if what you say is true
12|19|A caravan came by and sent their water carrier out to the well. When he drew out Joseph in his bucket, he shouted, "Glad news, a young boy!" The people of the caravan hid him amongst their belongings. God knows well what they do
12|20|In selling him they asked for a very small price and even then no one wanted to buy him
12|21|The Egyptian who bought him said to his wife, "Be kind to him, perhaps he will be of some benefit to us or we may adopt him." Thus, We settled Joseph in the land so that We could teach him the interpretation of dreams. God has full control over His affairs but most people do not know
12|22|When he attained maturity, God gave him strength, wisdom and knowledge. Thus, do We reward those who do good
12|23|His master's wife then tried to seduce him. She locked the doors and said to him, "Come on." He said, "I seek refuge in God who has given me a good place of shelter. The unjust will certainly have no happiness
12|24|She was determined to have him and were it not for his faith in God, he would certainly have yielded to her. Thus did We protect him from evil and indecency. He was certainly one of Our sincere servants
12|25|She chased him to the door, grabbed him from behind, and tore off his shirt. Suddenly, they were face to face with her husband. (Looking accusingly at Joseph) she asked her husband, "What punishment is more fitting for those who have evil desires towards your household other than imprisonment and painful torment
12|26|Joseph said, "It was she who tried to seduce me." Someone from the household in confirmation of Joseph's statement said, "If his shirt it torn from the front, she has spoken the truth and he is lying
12|27|but if his shirt is torn from behind, she is lying and he is speaking the truth
12|28|When the master saw that Joseph's shirt was torn from behind, he told his wife, "This is some of your womanly guile in which you are certainly skillful
12|29|Joseph, stay away from such affairs and you, woman, ask forgiveness for your sin; the guilt is yours
12|30|Some of the women in the town started to gossip saying, "The King's wife has tried to seduce her servant and has fallen madly in love with him. We think that she is in manifest error
12|31|When she heard their gossiping, she invited them to her house for a banquet and gave a knife to each of them. Then she told Joseph to appear before them. When they saw Joseph, they were so amazed that they cut their hands and said, "Goodness gracious! He is not a mortal but is a charming angel
12|32|She said, "This is the one on whose account you subjected me to all this blame. I tried to seduce him but he abstained. If he does not yield to me, I shall order him to be locked up in prison to make him humble
12|33|Joseph said, "Lord, prison is dearer to me than that which women want me to do. Unless You protect me from their guile, I shall be attracted to them in my ignorance
12|34|His Lord heard his prayers and protected him from their guile; He is All-hearing and All-knowing
12|35|Even after Joseph had been found innocent of any crime, the King and his people decided to imprison him for an appointed time (so that people would forget the incident)
12|36|Two young men were also sent to serve prison sentences (for different reasons). One of them said, "I had a dream in which I was brewing wine." The other one said, "In my dream I was carrying some bread on my head and birds were eating that bread." They asked Joseph if he would interpret their dreams. They said, "We believe you to be a righteous person
12|37|(Joseph) said, "To prove that my interpretation of your dream is true, I can tell you what kind of food you will receive even before it comes to you. My Lord has given me such talents. I have given up the tradition of the people who do not believe in God and the Day of Judgment
12|38|and I have embraced the religion of my fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. We are not supposed to consider anything equal to God. This is part of God's blessing to us and the people, but most people do not give thanks
12|39|My fellow-prisoners can many different masters be considered better than One All-dominant God
12|40|What you worship instead of God are no more than empty names that you and your fathers have given to certain things. God has not given any authority to such names. Judgment belongs to no one but God. He has commanded you to worship nothing but Him. This is the only true religion, but most people do not know
12|41|Fellow-prisoners, your dreams tell that one of you will serve wine to his master and the other will be crucified and his head consumed by the birds. Judgment has already been passed about the meaning of the dreams that you asked about
12|42|Joseph asked the one, whom he knew would not be executed, to mention his case to his Lord. Satan caused that man to forget all about Joseph and his case. Thus, Joseph remained in prison for some years
12|43|(Sometimes later), the King dreamt that seven lean cows were eating seven fat ones and that there were seven green ears of corn and seven dry ones. He asked the nobles to tell him the meaning of his dream if they were able to
12|44|They replied, "It is a confused dream and we do not know the meaning of such dreams
12|45|The man who was in prison with Joseph and who was released, recalled after so many years Joseph's (ability to interpret dreams) and said, "I can tell you the meaning of this dream if you allow me to go (to the prison and ask the man who knows the meanings of dreams)
12|46|(He went to the prison) and said to Joseph, "You are a man of truth. Would you tell me the meaning of a dream in which seven fat cows eat up seven lean ones and the meaning of seven green ears of corn and seven dry ones? I hope you can tell me the right meaning and save people from confusion
12|47|(Joseph) said, "Cultivate your lands for seven years as usual and preserve the produce with its ears each year except the little amount that you will consume
12|48|After this will ensue seven years of famine in which all the grain that you have stored will be consumed except a small quantity
12|49|Then there will be a year with plenty of rain and people will have sufficient milk and other produce
12|50|The King ordered his people to bring Joseph into his presence. When the messenger came to Joseph, he (Joseph) said, "Ask your master about the women who cut their hands. My Lord knows all about their guile
12|51|The King asked the women about their attempt to seduce Joseph. They replied, "God forbid! We do not know of any bad in Joseph." The wife of the King said, "Now the truth has come to light. It was I who tried to seduce Joseph. He is, certainly, a truthful man
12|52|(Joseph said), "This proves that I was not disloyal to the King in his absence. God does not grant success to the efforts of disloyal people
12|53|I do not think that I am free from weakness; all human souls are susceptible to evil except for those to whom my Lord has granted mercy. My Lord is certainly All-forgiving and All-merciful
12|54|The King ordered his men to bring Joseph before him. He wanted to grant him a high office. The King said to Joseph, "From now on you will be an honored and trusted person among us
12|55|Joseph said, "Put me in charge of the treasuries of the land. I know how to manage them
12|56|Thus, We settled Joseph in the land to live wherever he wanted. We grant a due share of Our mercy to whomever We want and We do not ignore the reward of the righteous ones
12|57|The reward in the next life is certainly better for the faithful ones who have observed piety in this life
12|58|Joseph's brothers came to him. When they entered his court, he recognized them. They did not know him
12|59|When he had furnished them with provisions, he said, "Next time, bring me your other brother from your father. As you can see, I give each of you a certain amount of grain; I am a polite host
12|60|If you do not bring him, do not come to us for we shall not give you any more grain
12|61|Joseph's brothers said, "We shall try to influence his father to send him with us and we shall be successful
12|62|Then Joseph told his people to put his brothers' money back into their bags so that perhaps they would recognize it, when at home, and come back to Egypt once again
12|63|When they returned to their father, they told him, "Father, (unless we take our brother) they will refuse us one further measure of grain. Send our brother with us so that we can obtain that measure. We shall watch over him carefully
12|64|Jacob replied, "How can I trust you after what happened to his brother before? Only God is the best Protector. His mercy is far greater than that of others
12|65|When they opened their baggage, they found that their money had been returned to them. They said, "Father, what more do we want? Our money has been given back to us. We can buy more provisions with this for our family. We shall protect our brother and have one more camel load of grain which is easy to get
12|66|(Jacob) said, "I shall not send him with you until you solemnly promise me before God to return him to me unless you are prevented from doing so." When they gave their promise, he said, "God is the Witness of what we have said
12|67|Jacob then told his sons, "Do not enter the town all together by a single gate, but each of you enter separately. I cannot help you against (the decree of) God. Everyone's destiny is in His hands. I put my trust in Him. Whoever needs a trustee must put his trust in God
12|68|Even though they entered the town as their father had told them, it would not have been of any avail to them against the decree of God. It only served to satisfy Jacob's desire and judgment. He was certainly well versed by Our instruction, but most people do not know
12|69|When they entered Joseph's court, he gave lodging to his own brother (Benjamin) and said, "I am your brother. Do not feel sad about whatever they had done
12|70|When he had furnished them with provisions, he placed the King's drinking cup in his own brother's baggage. Then someone shouted, "People of the caravan, you are thieves
12|71|Joseph's brothers turned around and asked, "What is missing
12|72|They were told, "The King's drinking cup is missing and whoever brings it will receive a camel's load of grain. I promise you that
12|73|Joseph's brothers said, "We swear by God, as you know, that we have not come to spread evil in the land and that we have not committed any theft
12|74|The Egyptians said, "What do you suggest should be the punishment for the thief, if it is proved that you are lying
12|75|Joseph's brothers replied, "In whosoever baggage it is found, that person will be your bondsman. Thus is the punishment of the unjust
12|76|They searched their baggage before that of Joseph's real brother where at last they found it. Thus, We showed Joseph how to plan this; he would not have been able to take his brother under the King's law unless God had wanted it to be so. We give a high rank to whomever We want. Over every knowledgeable person is one more knowing
12|77|(Joseph's) brothers said, "It's no wonder that he steals; a brother of his had stolen before him." Joseph noted their remarks, but did not utter a word. He said (to himself), "You are in a worse position. God knows best what you allege
12|78|They said, "Noble Prince, his father is very old so please take one of us in his place. We believe that you are a righteous person
12|79|He replied, "God forbid! How could I take someone in place of the thief? In doing so I would be committing injustice
12|80|When they lost all hope (of convincing the Prince), they moved into a corner whispering to each other. The eldest among them said, "Do you not remember that you had solemnly promised our father to return Benjamin to him and that before this you had broken your promise concerning Joseph? I shall never leave this land until my father gives me permission or God decides for me; He is the best Judge
12|81|Go to our father and tell him, 'Father, your son committed theft. We say only what we have seen and we have no control over the unseen
12|82|You can ask the people of the town where we were and the caravan we met there. We are certainly telling the truth
12|83|(When he heard this), Jacob said, "Your souls have tempted you to make up the whole story. Let us be patient for perhaps God will bring them all back to me. God is certainly All-knowing and All-wise
12|84|(Jacob) turned away from them saying, "Alas, Joseph is lost!" He wept continuously in his grief until, in suppressing his anger, his eyes turned white
12|85|They said, "You are always remembering Joseph. By God, it will either make you sick or you will die
12|86|He replied, "I only complain of my sorrow and grief to God. I know about God what you do not know
12|87|My sons, go and search for Joseph and his brother and do not despair of receiving comfort from God; only the unbelievers despair of receiving comfort from Him
12|88|When they entered Joseph's court, they said, "Noble Prince, hardship has struck us and our people. We have come with a little money, so give us a measure of grain and be charitable to us. God will give the reward to those who give charity
12|89|Joseph asked them, "Do you know what you did to Joseph and his brother in your ignorance
12|90|Then they inquired, "Are you Joseph?" He said, "Yes, I am Joseph and this is my brother. God has indeed been gracious to us. One who exercises patience and observes piety should know that God does not ignore the reward of the righteous ones
12|91|They said, "We swear by God that He has given preference to you over us and we have sinned
12|92|(Joseph) said, "No one will blame you on this day. God will forgive you; He is more Merciful than others
12|93|Take my shirt and place it unto my father's face. This will restore his eye-sight. Then bring the whole family to me
12|94|When the caravan left the town, their father said, "I smell Joseph's scent. I hope that you will not accuse me of senility
12|95|His people said, "By God, you are still making the same old error
12|96|When someone brought him the glad news, Joseph's shirt was placed on his face and his eye-sight was restored, he said, "Did I not tell you that I know about God that which you do not know
12|97|They said, "Father, ask God to forgive our sins; we have certainly sinned
12|98|He said, "I shall ask my Lord to forgive you; He is All-forgiving and All-merciful
12|99|When they all came to Joseph, he welcomed his parents and said, "Enter the town in peace, if God wants it to be so
12|100|He raised his parents on the throne and they prostrated themselves before him (Joseph). He said, "This is the meaning of my dream which God has made come true. He has granted me many favors. He set me free from prison and brought you to me from the desert after having ended the enmity which satan sowed between my brothers and I. My Lord is certainly kind to whomever He wants. It is He who is All-forgiving and All-wise
12|101|My Lord, You have given me the kingdom and taught me the meaning of dreams. You are the Creator of the heavens and the earth. You are my Guardian in this world and in the life to come. Make me die as one who has submitted to the Will of God and unite me with the righteous ones
12|102|This is some of the news of the unseen which We reveal to you, (Muhammad). You were not with them when Joseph's brothers agreed on devising their evil plans
12|103|However hard you try, most people will not believe
12|104|You do not ask any reward for your preaching (of Our guidance to them). This (Quran) is a guide for the people of the world (human beings and jinn)
12|105|There is much evidence (of the existence of God) in the heavens and the earth which they see, but ignore
12|106|Most of them do not believe in God; they are but pagans
12|107|Do they feel safe from God's overwhelming torment or of the sudden approach of the Day of Judgment while they are unaware
12|108|(Muhammad), say, "This is my way. I and all my followers invite you to God with proper understanding. God is most Glorious. I am not a pagan
12|109|The Messengers whom We sent before you were mere men of the people of the towns. We gave them revelations. Have they (the unbelievers) not travelled sufficiently through the land to see how terrible the end was of those who lived before. The next life is, certainly, better for the pious ones. Will you not then take heed
12|110|When at last the Messengers lost all hope of achieving success in their task and thought that everyone had called them liars, We gave them victory and saved whomever We chose to save. The guilty ones can not escape Our wrath
12|111|In their story, there is a lesson for the people of understanding. It is not a legend but a confirmation of what exists (in the Torah). It (the Quran) has details about everything. It is a guide and mercy for those who have faith
13|1|Alif. Lam. Mim. Ra. These are the verses of the Book. Whatever is revealed to you from your Lord is the Truth, but most people do not believe
13|2|God is the One Who raised the heavens without a pillar as you can see. Then He established his control over the realm and made the sun and moon subservient to Him. Each of them will remain in motion for an appointed time. He regulates all affairs and explains the evidence (of His existence) so that perhaps you will be certain of your meeting with your Lord
13|3|It is God who spread out the earth and fixed mountains and placed rivers therein. He made a pair of every fruit and made the night cover the day. All this is evidence (of the existence of God) for the people who think
13|4|In the earth there are adjacent pieces of land, vineyards, farms, date-palms of single and many roots which are all watered by the same water. We have made some yield a better food than others. All this is evidence (of the existence of God) for the people who understand
13|5|If there is anything to make you wonder, it would be the words of those who say, "When we become dust, shall we be brought back to life again?" They are disbelievers in their Lord and will wear heavy fetters around their necks. They are the dwellers of the hell fire wherein they will live forever
13|6|They ask you to bring upon them punishment before they ask you for mercy. Such punishments were already brought upon the people who lived before them. Your Lord, certainly, has forgiveness for the injustice of the people. He is also stern in His retribution
13|7|The unbelievers say, "Why has God not sent him, (Muhammad), some miracles." (Muhammad), you are only a warner. For every nation there is a guide
13|8|God knows well what every female conceives. He knows what the wombs spoil and dispose of. In His plans everything has been designed proportionately
13|9|He knows all the unseen and seen. He is the most Great and High
13|10|It is all the same to Him whether you speak in secret or out loud, try to hide in the darkness of night or walk in the brightness of day
13|11|Everyone is guarded and protected on all sides by the order of God. God does not change the condition of a nation unless it changes what is in its heart. When God wants to punish a people, there is no way to escape from it and no one besides God will protect them from it
13|12|It is God who flashes lightning to frighten you and to give you hope. It is He who forms the heavy clouds
13|13|Both the thunder and the angels glorify Him and out of His fear always praise Him. He sends down thunder-bolts to strike whomever He wants, while they are busy arguing about the existence of God. His punishment is stern
13|14|Prayer to Him is the true prayer. Those to whom they pray instead of God will answer none of their prayers. It is as though one stretches his hands out to the water that can never reach his mouth. The prayers of the unbelievers will get nowhere
13|15|All in the heavens and the earth prostrate themselves before God, either of their own free will or by force, just as do their shadows in the mornings and evenings
13|16|(Muhammad), ask them, "Who is the Lord of the heavens and the earth?" Say, "It is God." Ask them, "Why then have you taken guardians other than God when such guardians can neither benefit nor harm themselves?" Ask them, "Are the seeing and the blind equal? Is light equal to darkness?" Do they consider that their idols have created anything like that of God, thus, both creations appear to them to be alike?" Say, "God alone is the Creator of all things and He is the One, the All-Dominant
13|17|When God sends down water from the sky and floods run through the valleys, certain quantities of foam rise on the surface of the flood water. This is similar to that foam which rises when you expose something to the heat of a fire to manufacture ornaments or for other reasons. To God Truth and falsehood are like these examples. The foam disappears but what is profitable to the human being stays in the land. Thus, does God coin His parables
13|18|Those who answer the call of their Lord will receive good rewards. Whatever those who have not answered the call of their Lord offer to redeem themselves, even if they offer double the wealth of the whole earth, will not be accepted. They will face a terrible reckoning and their dwelling will be hell, a terrible place to rest
13|19|Can a person, who knows that what is revealed to you from your Lord is the truth, be considered equal to a blind person? Only those who have understanding take heed
13|20|Those who fulfill their promise to and covenant with God
13|21|who maintain all the proper relations that God has commanded them to maintain, who have fear of their Lord and the hardships of the Day of Judgment
13|22|who exercise patience to gain God's pleasure, who are steadfast in prayer, who spend for the cause of God privately and in public, and who keep away evil with good will have a blissful end
13|23|They will be admitted to the gardens of Eden wherein they will live forever with their righteous fathers, spouses, and offspring. The angels will come to them through every gate
13|24|saying, "Peace be with you for all that you have patiently endured. Blessed is the reward of Paradise
13|25|Those who disregard their covenant with God after He has taken such a pledge from them, who sever the proper relations that God has commanded them to establish, and those who spread evil in the land will have God's condemnation instead of reward and will face the most terrible end
13|26|God gives abundant sustenance to whomever He wants and determines everyone's destiny. Some people are very happy with the worldly life. Compared to the life to come it is only a temporary means
13|27|The unbelievers say, "Why have not some miracles been sent to him, (Muhammad), from his Lord." Say, "God causes whomever He wants to go astray and He guides those who turn to Him in repentance
13|28|and the faithful ones whose hearts are comforted by the remembrance of God. Remembrance of God certainly brings comfort to all hearts
13|29|The righteously striving believers will receive abundant blessings and the best eternal dwelling
13|30|We have sent you to a nation before whom there lived many nations so that you would read to them what We have revealed to you. They still deny the existence of the Beneficent God. Say, "He is my Lord besides whom there is no other God. I trust Him and turn to Him in repentance
13|31|Even if the Quran would make mountains move, cut the earth into pieces and make the dead able to speak, (the unbelievers still would not believe). All affairs are in the hands of God. Do the believers still hope that they will believe? Had God wanted he could have guided the whole of mankind to the right path. The unbelievers will always suffer afflictions that result from their deeds or the affliction which occur near their homes, until God's promise of punishing them will be fulfilled. God does not disregard His promise
13|32|(Muhammad), people have mocked the Messengers who lived before you. I gave a respite to the unbelievers (so that they would repent, but they did not). Then I struck them with a terrible retribution
13|33|(Can anyone be considered equal to) the One who is the Guardian of every soul and the Watcher of what it has gained? Yet, the unbelievers have considered their idols equal to God. Say, "Name the attributes of your idols. Are you trying to tell God about something that does not exist on the earth? Do you only mention empty names? Evil plans have attracted the unbelievers and have misled them from the right path. No one can guide those whom God has caused to go astray
13|34|The unbelievers will face torment in this world and their punishment in the life hereafter will be even greater. No one can save them from the wrath of God
13|35|The gardens which have been promised to the pious have flowing streams, everlasting fruits, and perpetual shade. Such is the blissful end of the pious, but hell fire is the terrible end for the unbelievers
13|36|The People of the Book are happy with what has been revealed to you. Among the different parties, there are some who dislike part of what has been revealed to you. (Muhammad), tell them, "I have been commanded to worship God alone, not to consider anything equal to Him. To Him do I pray and to Him shall I return
13|37|We revealed it (the Quran) as a code of conduct in the Arabic language. (Muhammad), if you follow their desires after the knowledge has been revealed to you, know that no one will be able to guard or protect you from the wrath of God
13|38|We sent Messengers before you (Muhammad) and gave them wives and offspring. No Messenger was to show miracles without the permission of God
13|39|For every event God has ordained His decree. God establishes or effaces whatever He wants and with Him is the original of the Book
13|40|Whether We show them (the unbelievers) to you facing the punishment with which We had threatened them, or make you die first (before its fulfillment), your duty is only to preach. It is up to Us to call them to account (for their deeds)
13|41|Have they not considered that We have taken over the land and reduced its borders? It is God who issues the irreversible decree and His reckoning is swift
13|42|Certain people who lived before plotted evil plans but God is the Master of all plans. He knows what every soul does. The unbelievers will soon learn who will achieve the blissful end
13|43|(Muhammad), the unbelievers say, "You are not a Messenger." Say, "God and those who have the knowledge of the Book are sufficient witness (to my prophethood)
14|1|Alif. Lam. Ra. A Book has been revealed to you, (Muhammad), so that, by the permission of their Lord, you would be able to lead people from darkness into light along the path of the Majestic, Praised One
14|2|To God belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth. Woe to the disbelievers; they will face the most severe punishment
14|3|It is they who have given preference to the worldly life over the life to come. They create obstacles in the way that leads to God and try to make it seem crooked. They are in manifest error
14|4|All the Messengers that We sent spoke the language of their people so that they could explain (their message to them). God guides or causes to go astray whomever He wants. He is Majestic and All-wise
14|5|We sent Moses and gave him miracles in order to lead his people from darkness into light and to remind them of the days of God. In this there is evidence (of the truth) for those who exercise patience and give thanks
14|6|Moses told his people, "Remember the favors that God granted you when He saved you from the people of the Pharaoh who had punished you in the worst manner by murdering your sons and keeping your women alive. It was a great trial for you from your Lord
14|7|Remember when your Lord said to you, 'If you give thanks, I shall give you greater (favors), but if you deny the Truth, know that My retribution is severe
14|8|Moses told his people, "If you and everyone on the earth turn to disbelief, know that God is Self-sufficient and Praiseworthy
14|9|Have you (believers) ever heard the news about those who lived before you, like the people of Noah, Ad, Thamud, and those who lived after them? No one knows about them except God. Messengers were sent to them with miracles, but they put their hands to their mouths and said, "We do not believe in whatever you preach and we are also doubtful and uncertain about that to which you invite us
14|10|The Messengers asked them, "Could there be any doubt about the existence of God who has created the heavens and the earth? He calls you to Himself to forgive your sins. He gives you respite only until the appointed time." They said, "You are mere mortals like us. What you want is to prevent us from worshipping that which our fathers worshipped. Show us clear proof (if what you say is true)
14|11|The Messengers replied, "We are certainly mere mortals like you, but God bestows His favors on whichever of His servants He wants. We can not bring you authority without the permission of God. The faithful should trust in God alone
14|12|Why should we not trust in God when He has shown us the right way? We shall exercise patience against the troubles with which you afflict us. Whoever needs a trustee should trust in God
14|13|The disbelievers told the Messengers, "We shall expel you from our land unless you revert to our religion." Their Lord then sent them (the messengers) a revelation, "We have decided to destroy the unjust
14|14|and settle you in the land thereafter. This is for those who are afraid of Me and of My warning
14|15|They prayed for victory and the haughty transgressors were defeated
14|16|Thereafter they will face hell fire wherein they will drink boiling water
14|17|As they sip the unpleasant water, death will approach them from all sides, but they will never die. In addition to this, they will experience the most intense torment
14|18|The deeds of those who deny the existence of their Lord are like ashes blown about by a strong wind on a stormy day. They will achieve nothing from their deeds. (What they have done) is a manifest error
14|19|Do you not realize that God has created the heavens and the earth for a genuine purpose
14|20|and that it is not at all difficult for God to replace you with another creature if He so wills
14|21|(On the Day of Judgment) everyone will appear before God and those who have been suppressed will say to their oppressors, "We were your followers, can you do anything to rescue us from the torment of God?" They will reply, "Had God guided us, we would also have guided you. It makes no difference whether we cry for help or exercise patience; there is no escape for us
14|22|When the decree of God is issued, satan will say, "God's promise to you was true, but I, too, made a promise to you and disregarded it. I had no authority over you. I just called you and you answered. Do not blame me but blame yourselves. I cannot help you and you cannot help me. I did not agree with your belief that I was equal to God." The unjust will face a painful punishment
14|23|The righteously striving believers will be admitted to the gardens wherein streams flow and they will live therein forever, by the permission of their Lord. Their greeting to each other will be, "Peace be with you
14|24|Consider (Muhammad) how God (in a parable) compares the blessed Word to that of a blessed tree which has firm roots and branches rising up into the sky
14|25|and yields fruits in every season, by the permission of its Lord? God sets forth parables for people so that they may take heed
14|26|An evil word is compared to an evil tree with no firm roots in the land and thus has no stability
14|27|God strengthens the faith of the believers by the true Words in this world and in the life to come. He causes the unjust to go astray and does whatever He pleases
14|28|Have you not seen those who changed the Word of God through disbelief and led their people to destruction
14|29|They will suffer in Hell. What a terrible place to stay
14|30|To lead people astray, they claimed their idols were equal to God. (Muhammad), tell them, "Enjoy yourselves and know that the only place for you to go will be hell fire
14|31|Tell My believing servants to be steadfast in prayer and to spend for the cause of their Lord, both in private and in public, out of what We have given them. Let them do this before the coming of the day when there will be no merchandising or friendship
14|32|God is the One who created the heavens and the earth, sent down water from the sky by which He produced fruits for your sustenance, enabled you to use boats to sail on the sea, and placed the rivers at your disposal, all by His command
14|33|He made the sun and moon, each following its course, and the day and the night all subservient to you
14|34|He has given you everything that you asked Him for. Had you wanted to count the bounties of God, you would not have been able to do it. The human being is unjust and disbelieving
14|35|(Muhammad), consider when Abraham prayed, "Lord, make this (Mecca) a peaceful territory and save me and my offspring from worshipping idols
14|36|Lord, the idols have misled many people. Whoever follows me is my friend. As for those who disobey, You are certainly All-forgiving and All-merciful
14|37|Lord, I have settled some of my offspring in a barren valley near your Sacred House so that they could be steadfast in prayer. Lord, fill the hearts of the people with love for them and produce fruits for their sustenance so that they may give thanks
14|38|Lord, You know all that we conceal or reveal. Nothing in the heavens or the earth is hidden from God
14|39|It is only God who deserves all praise. I praise Him for His giving me my sons Ishmael and Isaac during my old age. My Lord, certainly, hears all prayers
14|40|Lord, make me and my offspring steadfast in prayer and accept our worship
14|41|Lord, on the Day of Judgment, forgive me and my parents and all the believers
14|42|(Muhammad), do not think that God is unaware of what the unjust people do. He only gives them a respite until the day when the eyes will stare fixedly
14|43|when people will hurry in fright, their heads raised, their eyes unable to look around, and their hearts stunned due to the confusion (which will prevail on that Day)
14|44|(Muhammad), warn the people of the day when torment will approach them and the unjust will say, "Lord, give us respite for a little time so that we may answer your call and follow the Messengers." (The answer to their prayer will be), "Did you not swear before that you would never perish
14|45|You lived in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves, even though it was made clear to you how We dealt with them. We also showed you examples
14|46|They devised evil plans which were so sinful that even the mountains could not endure them. All these were known to God
14|47|You must not even think that God will disregard His promise to His messengers. God is Majestic and Revengeful
14|48|On the day when the earth and the heavens will be replaced by another earth and heavens and everyone will be brought before the One Almighty God
14|49|you will see the guilty ones bound in chains
14|50|with garments of pitch and faces covered by fire
14|51|This is how God will recompense each soul for its deeds. God's reckoning is swift
14|52|This is an admonition for the people that they will be warned and know that He is the only God, and so that the people of understanding may take heed
15|1|Alif. Lam. Ra. These are the verses of the Book and the glorious Quran
15|2|How strongly the unbelievers will wish that they had been Muslims
15|3|(Muhammad), leave them alone to eat and enjoy themselves and let their desires deceive them; they will soon know (the Truth)
15|4|We never destroyed any town without pre-ordaining the fate of its people
15|5|Every nation can only live for the time appointed for it
15|6|(The unbelievers have said), "You to whom the Quran has been revealed are insane
15|7|Why do you not bring down the angels if what you say is true
15|8|We do not send down angels except for a genuine purpose, at which time none will be given any further respite
15|9|We Ourselves have revealed the Quran and We are its Protectors
15|10|We sent Messengers to the ancient people who lived before you
15|11|No Messenger went to them whom they did not mock
15|12|This is how We cause the hearts of the guilty ones to behave
15|13|They do not believe in the Truth and they exactly follow the tradition of the ancient (unbelievers)
15|14|Had We opened a door for them in the sky through which they could easily pass
15|15|they would have said, "Our eyes are bewildered and we have been affected by magic
15|16|We have made constellations in the sky and decorated them for the onlookers
15|17|We have protected them from every condemned devil
15|18|except for those who stealthily try to listen to the heavens, but who are chased away by a bright flame
15|19|We have spread out the earth, fixed mountains thereupon and caused everything to grow to its proper weight
15|20|to provide you and those for whose sustenance you are not responsible, with the necessities of life
15|21|With Us is the source of everything and We do not send it down except in a known quantity
15|22|We send impregnating winds and send down water from the sky for you to drink and you have no (control over its) storage
15|23|It is We who give life and cause things to die and We are the sole Heirs
15|24|We know the people who lived before you and those who will come into existence after you
15|25|Your Lord will resurrect them all; He is All-wise and All-knowing
15|26|We have created the human being out of pure mud-moulded clay
15|27|and the jinn before (the human being) of smokeless fire
15|28|When your Lord said to the angels, "I will create the human being out of pure mud-moulded clay
15|29|When it is properly shaped and I have blown My Spirit into it, you should then bow down in prostration
15|30|All the angels prostrated before Adam
15|31|except Iblis who refused to join with the others in prostration
15|32|God asked Iblis, "What made you not join the others in prostration
15|33|Iblis replied, "I did not want to prostrate before a human being whom You have created out of mud-moulded clay
15|34|God told him, "Get out of the garden; you are rejected
15|35|and will be subjected to condemnation until the Day of Judgment
15|36|Iblis prayed, "Lord, grant me respite until the Day of Judgment
15|37|The Lord said, "Your request is granted
15|38|for an appointed time
15|39|Iblis said, "Lord, because you have caused me to go astray, I shall make earthly things attractive to (people) and mislead all of them
15|40|except Your sincere servants
15|41|God said, "The path which leads to Me is a straight
15|42|and you have no authority over My servants except the erring ones who follow you
15|43|Hell is the promised place for them all
15|44|It has seven gates and each gate is assigned for a certain group of people
15|45|The pious will live in gardens with streams
15|46|and they will be told to enter there in peace and safety
15|47|We shall remove all hatred from their breasts and make them as brothers reclining on thrones facing one another
15|48|No fatigue will touch them nor will they be expelled therefrom
15|49|(Muhammad), tell My servants that I am All-forgiving and All-merciful
15|50|and that My punishment is a painful one
15|51|Tell them about the guests of Abraham
15|52|who came to him saying, "Peace be with you." Abraham said, "We are afraid of you
15|53|They replied, "Do not be afraid. We have brought you the glad news of (the birth) of a learned son
15|54|Abraham asked, "Are you giving me the glad news of a son in my old age? What reason can you give for such glad news
15|55|They said, "We have given you the glad news for a true reason so do not despair
15|56|He said, "No one despairs of the mercy of his Lord except those who are in error
15|57|Messengers, what is your task
15|58|They said, "We are sent to a sinful people
15|59|Only the family of Lot will all be saved
15|60|except his wife who is doomed to be left behind
15|61|When the Messengers came to the family of Lot
15|62|he said, "You seem to be strangers
15|63|They replied, "We have come to you about the matter which the (unbelievers) have rejected
15|64|We have come to you for a genuine purpose and We are true in what we say
15|65|Leave the town with your family sometime during the night. Walk behind them and let no one turn around. Proceed as you are commanded
15|66|We informed him that the unbelievers would be utterly destroyed
15|67|The people of the town rejoicingly
15|68|rushed towards the house of Lot. Lot said to them, "These are my guests. Do not disgrace me
15|69|Have fear of God and do not humiliate me
15|70|They replied, "Did we not forbid you to bring anyone to your house
15|71|Lot said, "These are my daughters if you want them
15|72|By your life! In their drunkenness they were truly blind
15|73|An explosion struck them at sunrise
15|74|We turned the town upside-down and showered on them lumps of baked clay
15|75|In this there is evidence (of the Truth) for the prudent ones
15|76|That town lies on a road which still exists
15|77|In this there is evidence (of the Truth) for the believers
15|78|Since the People of the Forest were unjust
15|79|We afflicted them with punishment. Both people had clear (divine) authority among them
15|80|People of Hijr rejected the Messengers
15|81|We showed them miracles but they ignored them
15|82|They would carve secure houses out of the mountains
15|83|An explosion struck them in the morning
15|84|Out of what they had gained, nothing proved to be of any benefit to them
15|85|We have created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, for a genuine purpose. The Day of Judgment will certainly approach, so (Muhammad) forgive them graciously
15|86|Your Lord is certainly the All-knowing Creator
15|87|(Muhammad), We have given you the seven most repeated (verses) and the great Quran
15|88|Do not yearn for other people's property and wives and do not grieve (that they do not believe). Be kind to the believers
15|89|Say, "Indeed, I am simply one who warns
15|90|(We have given you the Quran) as We had given (the Bible) to those who divided themselves into groups
15|91|and also divided the Quran believing in some parts and rejecting others
15|92|By the Lord, We will hold them all responsible
15|93|for what they have done
15|94|Preach what you have been commanded to and stay away from the pagans
15|95|We shall help you against those who mock you
15|96|and believe other things to be equal to God. They will soon know the truth
15|97|We certainly know that you feel sad about what they say against you
15|98|Glorify and praise your Lord and be with those who prostrate themselves before God
15|99|Worship your Lord until you achieve the ultimate certainty
16|1|God's help will certainly support (the believers), so pagans do not (seek) to hasten it. God is too Glorious and Exalted to be considered equal to idols
16|2|He sends the angels with the Spirit to carry His orders to whichever of His servants He wants so that they would warn people that He is the only God and that people must have fear of Him
16|3|He has created the heavens and the earth for a genuine purpose. He is too Exalted to be considered equal to anything else
16|4|He created the human being from a drop of fluid but the human being openly disputes His Word
16|5|He created cattle which provide you with clothes, food, and other benefits
16|6|How beautiful you find them when you bring them home and when you drive them out to graze
16|7|They carry your heavy loads to lands which you would not have been able to reach without great difficulty. Your Lord is certainly Compassionate and All-Merciful
16|8|He created horses, mules, and donkeys for you to ride and as a means of beauty. He has also created things that you do not know
16|9|Some paths lead away from God but one must follow the path that leads to God. Had God wanted, He could have guided (all to the right path)
16|10|It is God who sends down water from the sky for you to drink and produces plants as pasture for your cattle
16|11|(With this water) He causes corn, olives, palm-trees, vines, and all kinds of fruits to grow. In this there is evidence (of the existence of God) for the people of understanding
16|12|God has made the day and the night, the sun and the moon, and all the stars subservient to you by His command. In this there is evidence of the truth for people of understanding
16|13|All that He has created for you on the earth are of different colors. In this there is evidence of the Truth for the people who take heed
16|14|It is God who put the oceans at your disposal so that you could find therein fresh fish for food and ornaments with which to deck yourselves with. You will find ships that sail for you so that you may travel in search of the bounties of God and give Him thanks
16|15|God has fixed the mountains on earth lest you should be hurled away when it quakes. Therein He has also made rivers and roads so that you will find your way
16|16|The stars and other signs also help people to find their way
16|17|Is the One who can create equal to the one who cannot create anything? Why, then, will you not consider
16|18|Even if you wanted to count up all of God's blessings, you would not be able to. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
16|19|God knows all that you conceal or reveal
16|20|Whatever (idols) they worship besides God can create nothing for they are themselves created
16|21|They are not living but are dead. They can not know when they will be raised
16|22|Your Lord is only One. The hearts of those who do not believe in the life hereafter dislike (the truth). They are puffed up with pride
16|23|God certainly knows whatever you conceal or reveal. He does not love the proud ones
16|24|When they are asked, "What has your Lord revealed to you?" they say, "Only ancient legends
16|25|Besides their own burdens, on the Day of Judgment, they will have to carry on the burdens of those whom they have misled without knowledge. How evil that burden will be
16|26|Those who went before them had also devised evil plans. God demolished their houses, destroying their very foundations. Their ceilings toppled on their heads and torment struck them from a direction which they had never expected
16|27|God will humiliate them on the Day of Judgment and ask them, "Where are the idols which you had considered equal to Me and which were the cause of hostility and animosity among you?" The people who were given knowledge will say, "It is the unbelievers who face disgrace and trouble on this day
16|28|The unjust, who will be seized by the angels, will submit themselves, obey, and say, "We were not evil-doers." But God certainly knows what they had been doing
16|29|They will be commanded to enter hell to live therein forever. How terrible will be the place of the proud ones
16|30|The pious ones will be asked, "What did your Lord reveal to you?" They will reply, "He revealed only good." The share of the righteous ones is virtue in this world and greater virtue in the life to come. How blessed will be the dwelling of the pious ones
16|31|They will be admitted into the gardens of Eden wherein steams flow and they will have therein whatever they want. This is how God will reward the pious ones
16|32|They will be received by the angels of mercy with the greeting, "Peace be with you. Enter Paradise as a reward for your good deeds
16|33|Are they (the disbelievers) waiting for the angels and the decree of your Lord to be fulfilled before they believe? The people who lived before them had also done the same thing. God did not do injustice to them, but they wronged themselves
16|34|The evil consequences of their deeds afflicted them and they were surrounded by what they had mocked
16|35|The pagans had said, "Had God wanted we would not have worshipped anything other than Him, nor would our fathers. We would not have forbidden anything without (a command from) Him." The same thing was said by the people who lived before them. Are the Messengers expected to do more than just preach
16|36|To every nation We sent a Messenger who told its people, "Worship God and stay away from satan." Some of them were guided by God and others were doomed to go astray. Travel through the land and see how terrible was the end for those who rejected the truth
16|37|(Muhammad), even though you have a strong desire to guide them, be sure that God will not guide those who have gone astray and no one will be able to help them
16|38|They strongly swear by God that God will not bring the dead to life. God's promise (of the Resurrection) will certainly come true but many people do not know
16|39|(Through the resurrection) God wants to make a clear distinction between right and wrong and make the unbelievers know that they were liars
16|40|When We want to bring something into existence, Our command is, "Exist," and it comes into existence
16|41|God settles those who leave their homes for His cause after having suffered injustice, in a prosperous dwelling in this life and greater rewards will be theirs in the life to come. Would that they knew this
16|42|(It is they) who have exercised patience and trust in their Lord
16|43|The Messengers whom We sent before you were mere mortals to whom We had sent with miracles and revelations. Ask those who know about the heavenly Books if you do not know about this
16|44|We have revealed the Quran to you so that you could tell the people what has been revealed to them and so that perhaps they will think
16|45|Can they who have devised evil plans expect to be safe from the command of God to the earth to swallow them up, or from a torment which might strike them from an unexpected direction
16|46|Are they confident that God will not seize them while they are on a journey? They will not be able to escape from God
16|47|Are they confident that God will not slowly destroy them? Your Lord is Compassionate and All-merciful
16|48|Can they not see that the shadows of whatever God has created turn to the right and to the left in prostration and submission to Him
16|49|Whatever is in the heavens and the earth, the cattle and the angels prostrate themselves before God without pride
16|50|They (angels) have fear of their Lord above them and fulfill His commands
16|51|God says, "Do not worship two gods. There is only One God. Have fear of Me
16|52|To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. God's retribution is severe. Should you then have fear of anyone other than God
16|53|Whatever bounties you have are from God. When hardship befalls you, you begin to cry out to Him
16|54|When He saves you from the hardship, some of you start to believe in idols
16|55|In the end you will reject Our bounties. Enjoy yourselves; you will soon know (the consequences of your deeds)
16|56|They give to unknown images a share out of the sustenance that We gave them. By God, you will be questioned about that which you have falsely invented
16|57|They ascribe daughters to God, God is too Exalted to have daughters, but they can have whatever they want
16|58|When the glad news of the birth of their daughter is brought to them, their faces turn gloomy and black with anger
16|59|They try to hide themselves from the people because of the disgrace of such news. Will they keep their new born despite the disgrace or bury it alive? How sinful is their Judgment
16|60|Those who do not believe in the life to come are evil examples. To God belongs all the exalted attributes; He is the Majestic and the All-wise
16|61|Was God to seize people immediately for their injustice, no living creature would be left on earth. He gives them respite for an appointed time. When their term is over, they will not be able to change the inevitable
16|62|They ascribe to God that which even they themselves do not like and their lying tongues say that their end will be virtuous. Their share will certainly be hell fire to which they are earnestly heading
16|63|By God, We sent (Messengers) to nations who lived before you. Satan made their deeds seem attractive to them and, on the Day of Judgment, satan will be their guardian. For them there will be a painful punishment
16|64|We have sent you the Book for no other reason than to settle their differences and to be a guide and mercy for those who believe
16|65|God has sent down water from the sky and has brought the dead earth to life. In this there is evidence (of the truth) for those who listen (carefully)
16|66|There is a lesson for you to learn concerning cattle. We provide pleasant milk for you to drink within the delicate system of their veins and arteries
16|67|The fruit of palm trees and vines which provide you with sugar and delicious food also provide a lesson and evidence (of the Truth) for the people of understanding
16|68|Your Lord inspired the bees, "Make hives in the mountains, in the trees and in the trellises
16|69|then eat of every fruit and follow the path of your Lord submissively." From out of their bellies comes a drink of different color in which there is a cure for the human being. In this there is evidence (of the truth) for the people of understanding
16|70|God has created you and He causes you to die. Some of you will grow to an extremely old age and lose your memory. God is All-knowing and Almighty
16|71|God has made some of you richer than others. The rich ones do not have to give away their property to their slaves to make them equally rich. Do they reject the bounties of God
16|72|God has created spouses for you from your own selves. He has created your sons and grandsons from your spouses and has given you pure things for your sustenance. Do they then believe in falsehood and reject the bounties of God
16|73|Do they worship things other than God which neither provide them with any sustenance from the heavens and the earth nor have the ability to do so
16|74|Do not consider anything equal to God. God knows that which you do not know
16|75|God tells a parable about a helpless servant and one to whom He has given honorable provisions and who has spent for the cause of God privately and in public. Can these two people be considered equal? It is only God who deserves all praise, but most people do not know
16|76|God tells a parable about two men. One of them is dumb and useless and a burden on his friend. Wherever he goes, he returns with nothing. Can he be considered equal to the one who maintains justice and follows the right path
16|77|To God belongs all the secrets of the heavens and the earth. It only takes God a twinkling of an eye or even less to make it the Day of Judgment. God has power over all things
16|78|When God brought you out of your mothers wombs, you knew nothing. He gave you ears, eyes, and hearts so that perhaps you would give Him thanks
16|79|Have you not considered the free movements of the birds high in the sky above? What keeps them aloft except God? In this there is evidence (of the truth) for the believing people
16|80|God has made your house the place for you to rest. He has also made homes for you out of the skins of cattle which are easy to carry along on a journey or at a camp. He has made wool, fur and the hair of cattle a temporary means of enjoyment for you
16|81|God has provided shade for you out of what He has created and places of retreat out of mountains. He has given you garments to protect you from the heat and cover your private parts. This is how He perfects His bounties to you so that perhaps you would submit to His will
16|82|(Muhammad), if they turn away, your only duty is to clearly preach to them
16|83|They recognize the bounties of God but they refuse them and most of them are unbelievers
16|84|On the day when We will call a witness from every nation, the disbelievers will not be given permission for anything, nor will they be allowed to seek solicitation
16|85|There will be no relief for them when the torment approaches the unjust nor will they be given any respite
16|86|When the idolators see their idols, they will say, "Lord, these are the idols whom we worshipped instead of you." But the idols will say, "They are liars
16|87|(On the Day of Judgment) the disbelievers will submit themselves to God and whatever they had falsely invented will disappear
16|88|The disbelievers who had created obstacles in the way leading to God will face manifold torments as a result of their evil deeds
16|89|On the day when We call a witness against every nation from their own people, We will call you, (Muhammad), as a witness against them all. We have sent you the Book which clarifies all matters. It is a guide, a mercy, and glad news to the Muslims
16|90|God commands (people) to maintain justice, kindness, and proper relations with their relatives. He forbids them to commit indecency, sin, and rebellion. God gives you advice so that perhaps you will take heed
16|91|(He commands people) to keep their established covenants with God, not to disregard their firm oaths; they have already appointed God as their Guarantor. God certainly knows what you do
16|92|Do not be like the lady behind the spinning wheel who has broken the yarn by pulling it with unnecessary force. You must not consider your oaths as means of deceit to benefit one party and incur loss upon the other. God tests your faith by your oaths. He will make clear to you who was right and who was wrong on the Day of Judgment
16|93|Had God wanted, He would have made you one single nation but He guides or causes to go astray whomever He wants. You will certainly be questioned about what you have done
16|94|Do not consider your oaths as a means of deceit lest you damage the firmness of your faith, suffer from evil by creating obstacles in the way that leads to God, and incur a great torment upon yourselves
16|95|Do not sell your covenant with God for a small price. The reward which you will receive from God is better for you, if only you knew it
16|96|Whatever you possess is transient and whatever is with God is everlasting. We will recompense those who exercise patience with their due reward and even more
16|97|All righteously believing male or female will be granted a blessed happy life and will receive their due reward and more
16|98|(Muhammad), when you recite the Quran, seek refuge in God from the mischief of satan
16|99|Satan has certainly no authority over the believers who have trust in their Lord
16|100|The only authority which he has is over his friends and those who consider things equal to God
16|101|When God replaces one revelation with another, He knows best what to reveal. But they say, "(Muhammad), you have falsely invented it." Most people are ignorant
16|102|(Muhammad), say, "The Holy Spirit has brought the Quran from your Lord to you in all truth to strengthen the faith of the believers and to be a guide and glad news for the Muslims
16|103|We know that they say a mere mortal has taught it (the Quran) to him (Muhammad). The language of the person whom they think has taught it to him is not Arabic. This (the Quran) is in illustrious Arabic
16|104|God will not guide those who do not believe in His miracles. They will suffer a painful punishment
16|105|Those who do not believe in the miracles of God invent lies and they are liars
16|106|No one verbally denounces his faith in God - unless he is forced - but his heart is confident about his faith. But those whose breasts have become open to disbelief will be subject to the wrath of God and will suffer a great torment
16|107|This is because they have given preference to this life over the life to come and God does not guide disbelieving people
16|108|God has sealed their hearts, ears and eyes and they are not aware of it
16|109|On the Day of Judgment they will certainly be lost
16|110|Those who left their homes for the cause of God after they had been persecuted, strove hard for His cause and exercised patience should know (even though they had verbally renounced their faith) that your Lord is All-forgiving and All-merciful
16|111|On the Day of Judgment every soul shall try to defend itself and every soul will be justly recompensed
16|112|God tells a parable about a secure and peaceful town surrounded by abundant sustenance. Its inhabitants rejected the bounties of God and He caused them to suffer hunger and fear as a result of their deeds
16|113|A Messenger from their own people came to them and they called him a liar. Torment struck them because of their injustice
16|114|(People), consume the pure and lawful sustenance which God has given to you and thank God for his bounty if you are His true worshippers
16|115|The only things which are made unlawful for you are the flesh of dead animals, blood, pork and that which is not consecrated with the Name of God. But in an emergency, without the intention of transgression and rebellion, (it is not an offense for one to consume such things). God is certainly All-forgiving and All-merciful
16|116|(Unbelievers), do not follow whatever your lying tongues may tell you is lawful or unlawful to invent lies against God. Those who invent lies against God will have no happiness
16|117|(Such an invention) will bring only a little enjoyment but will be followed by painful torment
16|118|We had made unlawful for the Jews all that we told you before. We did not do any wrong to them but they wronged themselves
16|119|To those who commit sins in their ignorance then repent and reform, your Lord is certainly All-forgiving and All-merciful
16|120|Abraham was, certainly, an obedient and upright person. He was not a pagan
16|121|He was thankful to God for His bounties. God chose him and guided him to the right path
16|122|We granted him virtue in this life and he shall be among the righteous ones in the life to come
16|123|We sent you, (Muhammad), a revelation that you should follow the tradition of Abraham, the upright one, who was not a pagan
16|124|(The observance) of the Sabbath was only sanctioned for those who disputed it. Your Lord will certainly issue His decree about their dispute on the Day of Judgment
16|125|Call (the pagans) to the path of your Lord through wisdom and good advice and argue with them in the best manner. God knows well about those who stray from His path and those who seek guidance
16|126|If you want retaliation, let it be equal to that which you faced. But if you exercise patience it will be better for you
16|127|Exercise patience and let it be only for the cause of God. Do not be grieved about them nor disappointed at their evil plans
16|128|God is certainly with the pious and the righteous ones
17|1|God is the Exalted One who took His servant one night for a visit from the Sacred Mosque (in Mecca) to the Aqsa Mosque (in Jerusalem). God has blessed the surroundings of the Aqsa Mosque. He took His servant on this visit to show him (miraculous) evidence of His (existence). It is He who is All-hearing and All-aware
17|2|To Moses We gave the Book and made it a guide for the children of Israel, so that they would not have any one as their guardian other than Me
17|3|(We made it a guide for) the offspring of those whom We carried in the Ark with Noah, a thankful servant (of God)
17|4|We made it known to the Israelites through the Torah that they would twice commit evil in the land with great transgression and rebellion
17|5|(We told them) during your first uprising of evil We shall send to you
17|6|Our Mighty servants, who will chase you from house to house. This is a decree already ordained. We, then, gave you a chance to defeat your enemies with the help of increasing your wealth and offspring
17|7|(We told you), "If you do good, it will be for your own benefit, but if you do bad, it will be against your souls. When the prophecy of your second transgression will come to pass, sadness will cover your faces. They (your enemies) will enter the mosque as they did the first time to bring about utter destruction
17|8|Perhaps your Lord will have mercy on you. If you return to disobedience We will also punish you again. We have made hell a prison for the disbelievers
17|9|This Quran shows the way to that which is the most upright and gives to the righteous believers the glad news of a great reward
17|10|(It also declares) that for the disbelievers We have prepared a painful torment in the life to come
17|11|People pray as earnestly to gain evil as one should to gain virtue. But people are hasty
17|12|We have made the day and night each as evidence (of Our existence). The night is invisible and the day is visible so that you may seek favors from your Lord and determine the number of years and mark the passing of time. For everything We have given a detailed explanation
17|13|We have made every person's actions cling to his neck. On the Day of Judgment, We will bring forth the record of his actions in the form of a wide open book
17|14|We will tell him, "Read it and judge for yourself
17|15|One who follows guidance does so for himself and one who goes astray does so against his soul. No one will suffer for the sins of others. We have never punished anyone without sending them Our Messenger first
17|16|When We decide to destroy a town We warn the rich ones therein who commit evil. Thus it becomes deserving to destruction and We destroy its very foundations
17|17|We have destroyed many generations after the time of Noah. Your Lord is All knowing and Well Aware of the sins of His servants
17|18|Whoever desires (only) the enjoyment of this life will receive it if We want it to be so. Then We will make Hell his reward wherein he will suffer, despised and driven away from Our mercy
17|19|The effort of one who faithfully strives hard for the (happiness) of the life to come will be appreciated (by God)
17|20|Each group will receive its share of your Lord's generosity. Your Lord's generosity is not limited
17|21|Consider how We have given preference to some people above others, yet the life to come has more honor and respect
17|22|Do not consider anything equal to God lest you will become despised and neglected
17|23|Your Lord has ordained that you must not worship anything other than Him and that you must be kind to your parents. If either or both of your parents should become advanced in age, do not express to them words which show your slightest disappointment. Never yell at them but always speak to them with kindness
17|24|Be humble and merciful towards them and say, "Lord, have mercy upon them as they cherished me in my childhood
17|25|Your Lord knows what is in your souls. If you would be righteous, know that He is All-forgiving to those who turn to Him in repentance
17|26|Give the relatives, the destitute and those who when on a journey have become needy, their dues
17|27|Do not be a wasteful spender. Squanderers are the brothers of satan. Satan was faithless to his Lord
17|28|If you are not able to assist them, at least speak to them in a kind manner
17|29|Do not be stingy nor over generous lest you become empty handed and bankrupt
17|30|Your Lord increases and determines the sustenance of whomever He wants. He is Well Aware and watches over His servants
17|31|Do not kill your children for fear of poverty. We will give sustenance to all of you. To kill them is certainly a great sin
17|32|Do not even approach adultery. It is indecent and an evil act
17|33|Do not kill a respectable soul without a just cause. If anyone is wrongfully killed, we have given the heirs of that person the right (to demand satisfaction or to forgive). He must not exceed the law in having vengeance; his victim shall also be assisted (by law)
17|34|Do not get close to the property of the orphans (unless it is for a good reason) until they are mature and strong. Keep your promise; you will be questioned about it
17|35|While weighing, use proper measurements in the exchange of your property. This is fair and will be better in the end
17|36|Do not follow what you do not know; the ears, eyes, and hearts will all be held responsible for their deeds
17|37|Do not walk proudly on the earth; your feet cannot tear apart the earth nor are you as tall as the mountains
17|38|All such things are sins and detestable in the sight of your Lord
17|39|(Muhammad), these are words of wisdom which your Lord has revealed to you. Do not consider anything equal to God lest you be thrown into hell, despised, and driven away from God's mercy
17|40|(Pagans) has your Lord given you preference over Himself by granting you sons and taking the angels as His own daughters? What you say is a monstrous utterance
17|41|We have given you various facts (about the Truth in this Quran) so that they (unbelievers) would take heed, but this has only increased their aversion (to the truth)
17|42|(Muhammad), ask them, "Had there been many other gods besides Him, as they say, they should have found a way to the Lord of the Throne
17|43|(to challenge Him). God is too Glorious and Exalted to be considered as they believe Him to be. He is the most High and Great
17|44|The seven heavens, the earth, and whatever is between them all glorify Him. There is nothing that does not glorify Him and always praise him, but you do not understand their praise and glorification. He is All-forbearing and All-forgiving
17|45|When you recite the Quran We place a curtain as a barrier between you and those who do not believe in the life to come
17|46|We put a veil over their hearts so that they cannot understand it. We deafen their ears. When you mention your Lord in this Quran as One (Supreme Being), they run away
17|47|We know what they want to hear when they listen to you. They whisper to each other and say, "You are only following a bewitched person
17|48|Consider what they have called you. They have certainly gone astray and cannot find the right path
17|49|The pagans say, "When we become mere bones and dust, shall we then be brought back to life again
17|50|(Muhammad), say "Yes, even if you become rocks, iron
17|51|or anything that you think is harder to be brought to life." They will soon ask, "Who will bring us back to life?" Say,"The One who created you in the first place." They will shake their heads and say, "When will He bring us back to life?" Say, "Perhaps very soon
17|52|On the day when He will call you, you will answer Him with praise and think that you have tarried for only a little while
17|53|(Muhammad), tell My servants to say what is best. Satan sows dissension among them; he is the sworn enemy of human beings
17|54|Your Lord knows better than you (people). He will have mercy on you or will punish you as He wills. We have not sent you to watch over them. Your Lord knows best about those in the heavens and the earth
17|55|We have given preference to some Prophets over others and We gave the psalms to David
17|56|(Muhammad), tell them, "Seek help from those whom you consider equal to God. They are not able to remove or change your hardships
17|57|Those whom they worship seek to find intercessors for themselves with God. (They try to find out which of the intercessors) are closer to God. They have hope for His mercy and fear of His punishment; the punishment of your Lord is awesome
17|58|The decree that all the towns were to be destroyed or afflicted with severe punishment was already written in the Book before the Day of Judgment
17|59|We did not abstain from sending miracles to any of Our Messengers. These miracles were called lies by the people who lived in ancient times. To the people of Thamud, We sent the she-camel as a visible miracle and they did injustice to it. We only send miracles as warnings
17|60|(Muhammad), We told you that your Lord has encompassed all mankind. We made the vision which We showed you and the condemned tree, mentioned in the Quran, as a trial for the human being. Even though We warn them, it only increases their rebellion
17|61|When We told the angels to prostrate before Adam, they all obeyed, except Iblis who said, "Should I prostrate before one whom You have created out of clay
17|62|He continued, "Remember, this one whom you have honored more than me I shall bring him and most of his offspring under my sway if you will give me respite until the Day of Judgment
17|63|God said, "Go away. All those who follow you will have hell as ample recompense for their deeds
17|64|Draw anyone of them you can into sin by your voice and by your cavalry and infantry, share their property and children with them and make promises to them. Your promises are all lies
17|65|You have no authority over My servants. Your Lord is a Sufficient Protector
17|66|Your Lord who causes the ships to sail on the sea so that you may seek His bounty is certainly All-merciful to you
17|67|If you are afflicted by hardships in the middle of the sea, it would be an error to call anyone other than Him for help. When God saves you from such difficulties, you turn away from Him. The human being has always been ungrateful
17|68|Do you feel secure that We will not cause a part of the land to sink or engulf you with sand storms when you would find no one to protect you
17|69|Do you feel secure that We will not drive you back to the sea, send a fierce gale to you, and cause you to drown because of your disbelief when you would not be able to find anyone who would intercede for you with Us
17|70|We have honored the children of Adam, carried them on the land and the sea, given them pure sustenance and exalted them above most of My creatures
17|71|On the day when We call every nation with their leaders, those whose record of deeds are given to their right hands will read the book and the least wrong will not be done to them
17|72|Those who are blind in this life will also be blind in the life to come and in terrible error
17|73|(Such blind ones) try to confuse what We have revealed to you so that they may falsely ascribe to Us something other than the true revelation and thus establish friendship with you
17|74|Had We not strengthened your faith you might have relied on them some how
17|75|Had you done so, We would certainly have made you face double punishment in this life and after your death and you would have found none to help you
17|76|They try to annoy you so that they can expel you from the land. Had they been successful, no one would have been left behind except a few
17|77|This was Our tradition with Our Messengers who lived before you, and you will find no change in Our tradition
17|78|Say your prayer when the sun declines until the darkness of night and also at dawn. Dawn is certainly witnessed (by the angels of the night and day)
17|79|Say your special (tahajjud) prayer during some part of the night as an additional (obligatory) prayer for you alone so that perhaps your Lord will raise you to a highly praiseworthy position
17|80|(Muhammad), say, "Lord, make me enter through a path that will lead to the Truth and come out of an exit that will take me to the Truth. Give me helpful authority
17|81|Say, 'Truth has come and falsehood has been banished; it is doomed to banishment
17|82|We reveal the Quran which is a cure and mercy for the believers but does nothing for the unjust except to lead them to perdition
17|83|When We do favors to the human being, he disregards it and turns away from it. When evil afflicts him, he becomes despairing
17|84|Say, "Everyone does as he wants. Your Lord knows best who has the right guidance
17|85|They ask you about the Spirit. Say, "The Spirit comes by the command of my Lord. You have been given very little knowledge
17|86|Had We wanted, We could have removed the Spirit through whom We sent you revelation. Then you would not have found anyone to intercede with Us for you
17|87|except by the mercy of your Lord. He has certainly bestowed great favors on you
17|88|Say, "If all human beings and jinn were to come together to bring the equivalent of this Quran, they could not do so, even if they all were to help each other
17|89|We have mentioned in this Quran all kinds of examples for the human being, but most human beings turn away in disbelief
17|90|They have said, "We shall never believe you until you cause a spring to gush forth from the earth
17|91|or you (show) us that you have your own garden of palm trees and vines with flowing streams therein
17|92|or cause the sky to fall into pieces on us - as you believe you can - or bring God and the angels face to face with us
17|93|or (show us) that you have a well adorned house of your own, or climb into the sky. We shall never believe that you have climbed into the sky until you bring us a book that we can read." Say, "All glory belongs to my Lord. Am I more than a mortal Messenger
17|94|What keeps people from belief that guidance has come to them, but they question, "Why has God sent a mortal Messenger
17|95|(Muhammad), say, "Had the earth been inhabited by angels who would walk serenely therein, only then would We have sent to them angelic Messengers
17|96|Say, "God is a sufficient Witness between me and you. He certainly sees and knows all about His servants
17|97|Whomever God has guided has the proper guidance. You will never find any guardian besides God for the one whom He has caused to go astray. On the Day of Judgment, We will gather them lying on their faces, blind, dumb and deaf. Hell will be their dwelling. As hell fire abates, We will increase its blazing force
17|98|This will be the recompense for their disbelief of Our revelations and for their saying, "Shall we be brought to life again after becoming bones and dust
17|99|Do they not realize that God, who has created the heavens and the earth, has the power to create their like? He has given them life for an appointed time of which there is no doubt. The unjust turn away in disbelief (from Our revelation)
17|100|Say, "Had you owned the treasures of the Mercy of my Lord, you would have locked them up for fear of spending them. The human being has always been stingy
17|101|To Moses We gave nine illustrious miracles. Ask the Israelites; Moses came to them. The Pharaoh said to him,"Moses, I believe that you are bewitched
17|102|He replied, "Certainly you have come to know that these have been sent by the Lord of the heavens and the earth as lessons to people. Pharaoh, I believe that you are doomed to perdition
17|103|The Pharaoh wanted to expel the Israelites from the land so We drowned him and all who were with him
17|104|We told the Israelites after this to settle in the land until Our second promise will come true. We would then gather them all together (on the Day of Judgment)
17|105|We sent it (the Quran) in all Truth and in all Truth it came. (Muhammad), We have sent you for no other reason than to be a bearer of glad news and a warner
17|106|We have divided the Quran into many segments so that you would read them to the people in gradual steps as We reveal them to you from time to time
17|107|Say, "It does not matter whether you believe in it or not, for when it is read to those who had received the knowledge (heavenly Books) that were sent before, they bow down and prostrate themselves before the Lord
17|108|They say, "Our Lord is too Glorious to disregard His promise
17|109|They bow down in prostration and weep and it makes them more humble (before the Lord)
17|110|(Muhammad), tell them, "It is all the same whether you call Him God or the Beneficent. All the good names belong to Him." (Muhammad), do not be too loud or slow in your prayer. Choose a moderate way of praying
17|111|Say, "It is only God who deserves all praise. He has not begotten a son and has no partner in His Kingdom. He does not need any guardian to help Him in His need. Proclaim His greatness
18|1|Praise be to God. He has sent the Book to His servant and has made it a flawless guide (for human beings)
18|2|so that he could warn them of His stern retribution, give the glad news of the best and everlasting reward to the righteously striving believers
18|3|wherein they shall remain forever
18|4|and admonish those who say that God has begotten a son
18|5|Neither they nor their fathers had any knowledge of such utterance (that God has begotten a son). Whatever they say about (this matter) is vicious blasphemy and plain lies
18|6|Perhaps you will destroy yourself out of grief because they disbelieve this Book
18|7|We have caused earthly things to seem attractive so that We can see who will excel in good deeds
18|8|Let it be known that We will turn all things on earth into dust
18|9|Do you not think that the story of the Companions of the Cave and the Inscription was one of Our marvelous miracles
18|10|When the youth sought refuge in the cave they prayed "Lord, grant us mercy and help us to get out of this trouble in a righteous way
18|11|We sealed their ears in the cave for a number of years
18|12|Then We roused them to find out which of the party had the correct account of the duration of their sleep in the cave
18|13|We tell you this story for a genuine purpose. They were young people who believed in their Lord and We gave them further guidance
18|14|We strengthened their hearts when they stood up against the idols and said, "Our Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth. We shall never worship anyone other than Him lest we commit blasphemy
18|15|Our people have considered other things equal to God. Why cannot they present clear proof in support of their claim. Who is more unjust than one who invents falsehood against God
18|16|(They were told), "Now that you have abandoned them and what they worship instead of God, seek refuge in the cave. God will, certainly, grant you mercy and provide you with help to safely get out of this trouble
18|17|No sunlight could reach them during their sleep in the cave. One could see the rising sun decline to the right of their cave and the setting sun move its way to the left whilst they were sleeping in an opening of the cave. This is one of the miracles of God. Whomever God guides receives the right guidance and you will never find a guardian or guide for those whom He causes to go astray
18|18|One would think them (the youths) awake while, in fact, they were sleeping. We turned their bodies from right to left and their dog stretched its front legs on the ground. Had one looked them over, he would have run away from them in terror
18|19|We roused them from their sleep so that they would question each other about their stay in the cave. One of them said, "How long do you think we have stayed here?" They replied, "A day or part of a day." They added, " Your Lord knows better how long we have stayed here. Let us send one of us with this money to the city to get some pure food so that we might eat. He should be careful so that no one will know about us. If they were to recognize us
18|20|they would certainly stone us to death or force us to follow their religion. Then we shall never be able to have everlasting happiness
18|21|We caused their story to become public so that people would know that God's promise was true and that there is no doubt about the coming of the Day of Judgment. They started to argue with each other about the matter (Resurrection) and some of them said, "Let us establish a building at the youths' sleeping place (to hide them). Their Lord knew best their intentions about them. The majority prevailed in their suggestion of the establishment of a mosque in that place
18|22|(With regard to the number of the youths) some say, "There were three and the dog was the fourth one," Others say, "There were five and the dog was the sixth one." In reality, they are just feeling around in the dark. Still some of them say, "There were seven and the dog was the eighth one." (Muhammad), say, "My Lord has the best knowledge of their number. You know very little about it." Do not insist on arguing with them, but merely tell them the story as it has been revealed to you and do not ask anyone about them
18|23|Never say of something, "I shall do it tomorrow
18|24|without adding, "if God wills." Recall your Lord if you forget to do something. Say, "I hope that my Lord will provide me better guidance
18|25|They, in fact, stayed in the cave for three hundred plus nine further years
18|26|(Muhammad), say, "God knows best how long they stayed there; to Him belongs the unseen of both the heavens and the earth. How clear is His sight and how keen His hearing! No one other than Him is their guardian and no one shares His Judgment
18|27|Read whatever is revealed to you from the Book of your Lord. No one can change His words and you can never find any refuge other than Him
18|28|Be patient with those who worship their Lord in the mornings and evenings to seek His pleasure. Do not overlook them to seek the worldly pleasures. Do not obey those whom We have caused to neglect Us and instead follow their own desires beyond all limits
18|29|Say," Truth comes from your Lord. Let people have faith or disbelieve as they chose." For the unjust We have prepared a fire which will engulf them with its (flames). Whenever they cry for help they will be answered with water as hot as molted brass which will scald their faces. How terrible is such a drink and such a resting place
18|30|The righteously striving believers should know that We do not neglect the reward of those who do good deeds
18|31|They will be admitted to the gardens of Eden wherein streams flow. They will rest on soft couches, decked with bracelets of gold and clothed in green silk garments and shining brocade. How blissful is such a reward and resting place
18|32|(Muhammad), tell them the parable of the two men. To one of them We had given two gardens of vines surrounded by the palm trees with a piece of farm land between them
18|33|and a stream flowing through the middle of the gardens
18|34|Both gardens would yield fruits to their fullest capacity. Whatever was produced belonged to him. To his friend he exclaimed, "I have more wealth and greater man-power than you
18|35|He unjustly entered his garden and said, "I do not think this (property) will ever perish
18|36|nor do I think that there will be a Day of Judgment. Even if I shall be brought before my Lord, I certainly deserve to have a better place than this
18|37|His friend said to him, "How can you disbelieve in the One who turned clay into sperm out of which He created you
18|38|I believe that He is God my Lord and I do not consider anything equal to Him
18|39|When entering your garden, you should have said, "This is what God willed; All Power belongs to Him. Even if you consider me inferior to yourself in wealth and offspring
18|40|perhaps my Lord will give me a garden better than yours and strike your garden with a thunderbolt from the sky to turn it into a barren ground
18|41|or cause the streams in your garden to disappear under the ground such that you will never be able to find them
18|42|(Sure enough the rich person's) fruits were all destroyed and he began to wring his hands in grief for all that he had invested in his garden. He found his garden tumbled to its trellises and said, "Would that I had not considered anything equal to my Lord
18|43|He had no one besides God to help him, nor could he himself achieve any success
18|44|In such helplessness, the human being realizes that it is God who is the true Guardian and His rewards and recompense are the best
18|45|(Muhammad), tell them, "The worldly life resembles the (seasonal) plants that blossom by the help of the water which God sends from the sky. After a short time all of them fade away and the winds scatter them (and turns them into dust). God has power over all things
18|46|Children and property are the ornaments of the worldly life, but for deeds which continually produce virtue one can obtain better rewards from God and have greater hope in Him
18|47|On the day when We will cause the mountains to travel around and the earth to turn into a levelled plain, We will also bring all human beings together. No one will be left behind
18|48|They will all be lined up in the presence of your Lord who will tell them, "Despite your belief that there would never be a Day of Judgment, all of you are brought in Our presence just as though We had created you for the first time. You believed that our promise could never come true
18|49|When the record of every one's deeds is placed before him, you will see the criminals terrified from what the record contains. They will say, "Woe to us! What kind of record is this that has missed nothing small or great?" They will find whatever they have done right before their very eyes. Your Lord is not unjust to any one
18|50|When We told the angels to prostrate before Adam they all obeyed except Iblis. He was a jinn and he sinned against the command of his Lord. Why do you (people) obey him and his offspring instead of Me, even though they are your enemies? How terrible will be the recompense that the wrong doers will receive
18|51|I did not call (the unjust) to witness the creation of the heavens and earth nor to witness their own creation nor did I want to be helped by those who lead people astray
18|52|On the day when God asks the idolators to seek help from their idols, they will call their idols for help. But the idols will not answer them; We shall separate the two parties from each other by a destructive gulf
18|53|When the criminals see hell fire, they will have no doubt about falling (headlong) therein, nor of finding anyone to save them
18|54|We have given various examples in this Quran for people to learn a lesson, but the human being is the most contentious creature
18|55|What prevents people from having faith when guidance comes to them or from asking for forgiveness from their Lord before they face the kind of torment that the ancient people experienced or a new form of torment
18|56|The only reason for Our sending the Messengers is to give the human being the glad news of Our mercy and to warn him about Our wrath. The disbelievers argue by false means to refute the Truth. They mock My miracles and warnings
18|57|Who are more unjust than those who are reminded of the revelations of their Lord but have disregarded them and have forgotten their deeds? We have veiled their hearts and sealed their ears so that they cannot understand. Even if you call them to the right path, they will never accept guidance
18|58|Your Lord is All-forgiving and All-merciful. Had He wanted to punish them for their sins, He would have been prompt to torment them. For their punishment there is an appointed time, after which there will be no way for them to escape
18|59|We only destroyed the inhabitants of certain towns when they had committed injustice and did not repent before Our deadline
18|60|(Consider) when Moses said to his young companion, "I shall continue travelling until I reach the junction of the two seas or have travelled for many years
18|61|When they reached the junction of the two seas they found out that they had forgotten all about the fish (which they had carried for food). The fish found its way into the sea
18|62|Moses asked his young companion when they crossed this point, "Bring us our food; the journey has made us tired
18|63|His companion replied, "Do you remember the rock on which we took rest? Satan made me forget to mention to you the story of the fish and how it miraculously made its way into the sea
18|64|Moses said, "That is exactly what we are seeking. They followed their own foot prints back (to the rock)
18|65|There they met one of Our servants who had received blessings and knowledge from Us
18|66|Moses asked him, "Can I follow you so that you would teach me the guidance that you have received
18|67|He replied, "You will not be able to have patience with me
18|68|How can you remain patient with that which you do not fully understand
18|69|Moses said, "If God wishes, you will find me patient and I shall not disobey any of your orders
18|70|He said to Moses, "If you will follow me, do not ask me about anything until I tell you the story about it
18|71|They started their journey and some time latter they embarked in a boat in which he made a hole. Moses asked him, "Did you make the hole to drown the people on board? This is certainly very strange
18|72|He said, "Did I not tell you that you would not be able to remain patient with me
18|73|Moses said, "Please, forgive my forgetfulness. Do not oblige me with what is difficult for me to endure
18|74|They continued on their journey until they met a young boy whom he killed. Moses said, "How could you murder an innocent soul? This is certainly a horrible act
18|75|He responded, "Did I not tell you that you will not be able to remain patient with me
18|76|Moses said, "If I ask you such questions again, abandon me; you will have enough reason to do so
18|77|They continued on their journey again until they reached a town. They asked the people there for food, but no one accepted them as their guests. They found there a wall of a house which was on the verge of tumbling to the ground. The companion of Moses repaired that wall. Moses said, "You should have received some money for your labor
18|78|He replied, "This is where we should depart from one another. I shall give an explanation to you for all that I have done for which you could not remain patient
18|79|The boat belonged to some destitute people who were using it as a means of their living in the sea. The king had imposed a certain amount of tax on every undamaged boat. I damaged it so that they would not have to pay the tax
18|80|The young boy had very faithful parents. We were afraid that out of love for him they would lose their faith in God and commit rebellion
18|81|so We decided that their Lord should replace him by a better and more virtuous son
18|82|The tumbling wall belonged to two orphans in the town whose father was a righteous person. Underneath the wall there was a treasure that belonged to them. Your Lord wanted the orphans to find the treasure through the mercy of your Lord when they mature. I did not repair the wall out of my own desire. These were the explanations of my deeds about which you could not remain patient
18|83|(Muhammad), they will ask you about Dhu 'l-Qarnayn. Say, "I shall tell you something about him
18|84|We had given him great power in the land and all kinds of resources
18|85|With these he traveled
18|86|to the West where he found the sun setting into a warm source (spring) of water and a people living near by. We asked him, "Dhu 'l-Qarnayn, you may punish them or treat them with kindness
18|87|He replied, "I shall punish the unjust ones among them and then they will return to their Lord, who will punish them more sternly
18|88|As for those who believe and do good, they will receive virtuous rewards and We will tell them to do only what they can
18|89|He travelled again
18|90|to the East where he found the sun rising upon a people whom We had exposed to its rays
18|91|This indeed was true. We knew all that he did there
18|92|He travelled
18|93|after this to the middle of two mountains where he found a people who could hardly understand a single word
18|94|They said, "Dhu 'l-Qarnayn, Gog and Magog are ravaging this land. Would you establish a barrier between us and them if we pay you a certain tax
18|95|He replied, "The power that my Lord has granted me is better (than your tax). Help me with your man-power and I shall construct a barrier between you and Gog and Magog
18|96|Bring me blocks of iron to fill up the passage between the two mountains." He told them to ply their bellows until the iron became hot as fire. Then he told them to pour on it molten brass
18|97|(Thus he constructed the barrier which) neither Gog nor Magog were able to climb nor were they able to dig a tunnel through the iron and brass barrier
18|98|Dhu l-Qarnayn said, "This barrier is a blessing from my Lord but when His promise comes to pass He will level it to the ground; His promise always comes true
18|99|On the day when the barrier is demolished, We will leave human beings in chaos. We will leave them like the waves of the sea striking against each other. Then the trumpet will be sounded and We will bring them all together
18|100|We will fully expose the view of hell on that Day to the disbelievers
18|101|whose eyes had been veiled against Our Quran and who were not able to hear (its recitation)
18|102|Do the unbelievers think they can make My servants as their guardians instead of Me? We have prepared hell as a dwelling place for the disbelievers
18|103|(Muhammad), tell them, "Should I tell you who will face the greatest loss as a result of their deeds
18|104|It will be those who labor a great deal in this life but without guidance, yet think that they are doing a great many good deeds
18|105|They have rejected the revelations of their Lord and their meeting with Him. Thus, their deeds will be made devoid of all virtue and will be of no value on the Day of Judgment
18|106|For their disbelief and their mocking Our revelations and Messengerss, their recompense will be hell
18|107|The righteously striving believers will have the gardens of Paradise as their dwelling place and therein they will live forever
18|108|without any desire to change their abode
18|109|(Muhammad), tell them, "Had the seas been used as ink to write down the words of my Lord, they would have all been consumed before the words of my Lord could have been recorded, even though replenished with a like quantity of ink
18|110|Say, "I am only a mortal like you but I have received revelation that there is only one Lord. Whoever desires to meet his Lord should strive righteously and should worship no one besides Him
19|1|Kaf. Ha. Ya. Ain. Sad
19|2|This is the story of the blessing of your Lord to His servant Zachariah
19|3|When he quietly called his Lord
19|4|and said, "My Lord, my bones have become feeble and my hair has turned white with age. Yet I have never been deprived in receiving from You the answer to my prayers
19|5|I am afraid of what my kinsmen will do after (my death) and my wife is barren. Lord, grant me a son
19|6|who will be my heir and the heir of the family of Jacob. Lord, make him a person who will please you
19|7|We answered his prayers with the glad news of the birth of a son by the name of John and told him, "We have never given such a name to anyone else
19|8|He said, "Lord, how can I have a son? My wife is barren and I have reached an extremely old age
19|9|(The angel) said, "This is true, but your Lord says, 'For Me it is easy; I created you when you did not exist
19|10|Zachariah asked, " Lord, show me evidence (if this is a heavenly news)." The Lord said, "The evidence for it is that you must not speak (to any mortal) though you are in good health for three nights (and days)
19|11|Zachariah came out to his people from place of worship and inspired them to glorify the Lord both in the morning and evening
19|12|We commanded John, Zachariah's son, to follow the guidance of the Lord with due steadfastness. To John We gave knowledge and wisdom to John during his childhood
19|13|We gave him compassion and purity. He was a pious human being
19|14|kind to his parents, not arrogant or a rebellious person
19|15|He was born and died in peace and will be brought back to life again in peace
19|16|(Muhammad), mention in the Book (the Quran) the story of Mary how she left her family and started living in a solitary place to the East
19|17|out of her people's sight. We sent Our Spirit to her, who stood before her in the shape of a well formed human being
19|18|Mary said, "Would that the Beneficent God would protect me from you. Leave me alone if you are a God fearing person
19|19|He said, "I am the Messengers of your Lord. I have come to give you a purified son
19|20|She said, "How can I have a son when no mortal has touched me nor am I an unchaste woman
19|21|He said, "This is true but your Lord says, "It is very easy for Me. We have decided to give you a son as evidence (of Our existence) for human beings and a mercy from Us. This is a decree already ordained
19|22|She conceived the child and retreated with him to a distant and solitary place
19|23|When she started to experience (the pain of) of childbirth labor, by the trunk of a palm tree in sadness she said, "Would that I had died long before and passed into oblivion
19|24|Then she heard the baby saying, "Do not be sad. Your Lord has caused a stream to run at your feet
19|25|If you shake the trunk of the palm tree, it will provide you with fresh ripe dates
19|26|Eat, drink, and rejoice. Should you see a person going by, tell him that on this day you have promised the Beneficent God to fast and never talk to any human being
19|27|She took him to her people and they said, "Mary, this is indeed an strange thing
19|28|Aaron's sister, your father was not a bad man nor was your mother unchaste
19|29|She pointed to the baby (and referred them to him for their answer). They said, "How can we talk to a baby in the cradle
19|30|He said, "I am the servant of God. He has given me the Book and has appointed me to be a Prophet
19|31|He has blessed me no matter where I dwell, commanded me to worship Him and pay the religious tax for as long as I live
19|32|He has commanded me to be good to my parents and has not made me an arrogant rebellious person
19|33|I was born with peace and I shall die and be brought to life again with peace
19|34|Such was the true story of Jesus, the son of Mary, about which they dispute bitterly
19|35|God is too Exalted to have a son. When He decides to bring some thing into existence He needs only command it to exist and it comes into existence
19|36|(Baby Jesus said), "Worship God who is my Lord as well as yours. This is the straight path
19|37|(The followers of Jesus) turned themselves into quarrelling sects. The disbelievers shall face a woeful condition on the great Day (of Judgment)
19|38|(Muhammad), how clearly they will hear and see on the day when they will be brought into Our presence. Today the wrong doers are in manifest error
19|39|Warn them of the woeful day when the final decree will be issued; they are neglectful and faithless
19|40|We are the heirs of the earth and those living in it will all return to Us
19|41|Mention the story of Abraham, the truthful Prophet, in the Book (the Quran)
19|42|who asked his father, "Father, why do you worship something that can neither hear nor see nor help you at all
19|43|Father, I have received the knowledge which has not been given to you. Follow me; I shall guide you to the right path
19|44|Father, do not worship satan; he has disobeyed the Beneficent God
19|45|Father, I am afraid that the Beneficent God's torment will strike you and you will become a friend of satan
19|46|His father replied, "Abraham, are you telling me to give-up my gods? If you will not stop this, I shall stone you to death. Leave my house and do not come back again
19|47|Abraham said, "Peace be with you. I shall ask my Lord to forgive you; He has been gracious to me
19|48|I shall stay away from you and what you worship instead of God. I worship my Lord and hope that my prayers will not be ignored
19|49|When (Abraham) rejected his people and what they worshipped instead of God, We gave him Isaac and Jacob and made both of them Prophets
19|50|We granted them Our blessing and high renown
19|51|(Muhammad), mention in the Book (the Quran) the story of Moses. Moses was a sincere person, a Messengers and a Prophet
19|52|We called him from the right side of Mount Sinai and drew him close for communication
19|53|Out of Our mercy We gave him his brother Aaron who himself was a Prophet
19|54|Mention in the Book (the Quran) the story of Ishmael; he was true to his promise, a Messengers and a Prophet
19|55|He would order his people to worship God and pay the religious tax. His Lord was pleased with him
19|56|Mention in the Book (the Quran) the story of Idris (Enoch); he was a truthful Prophet
19|57|We granted him a high position
19|58|These were the Prophets from the offspring of Adam, from those who embarked with Noah and from the offspring of Abraham and Israel. God guided them and chose them for His favor. Whenever they would hear the revelations of the Beneficent God they would bow down in prostration with tears
19|59|They were succeeded by a generation who neglected their prayers and followed their worldly desires. They will certainly be lost
19|60|but those among them who repent and become righteously striving believers will be admitted to the gardens without experiencing any injustice
19|61|They will be admitted to the garden of Eden which is the unseen promise of the Beneficent God to His servants. The promise of God will certainly come true
19|62|They will not hear therein any meaningless words. They will be greeted (by the angels) with "Peace be with you," and they will receive their sustenance both in the mornings and evenings
19|63|Such are the gardens which We will give to Our God-fearing servants as their inherited property
19|64|(Muhammad), we (the angels) do not come to you without being commanded by your Lord to do so. To Him belongs all that is before us, behind us, and in between. Your Lord is not forgetful
19|65|He is the Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them. Worship Him and be steadfast in your worship of Him; none is equal to Him
19|66|The human being says, "Shall I be brought to life again after I will die
19|67|Does he not remember that We created him when he did not exist
19|68|By your Lord, We will bring them back to life with satan and gather them around hell in large groups
19|69|Then We will separate from every group those who were strongly rebellious against the Beneficent God
19|70|We know best who deserves greater suffering in hell fire
19|71|It is the inevitable decree of your Lord that every one of you will be taken to hell
19|72|We will save the pious ones from the hell fire and leave the unjust people therein in crowded groups
19|73|When Our revelations are recited to them, the unbelievers say to the faithful ones, "Which of us is more prosperous
19|74|How many generations of greater prosperity and splendor have We destroyed before them
19|75|(Muhammad), tell them, "The Beneficent God gives respite to those who have gone astray only until they face the torment with which they were threatened or to the Day of Judgment. Then they will find out who will have the most miserable place and the weakest forces
19|76|God further enlightens those who seek guidance. To those who do charitable deeds which produce continuing benefits, your Lord will give a better reward and a better place in Paradise
19|77|Note the words of the disbeliever, "I shall certainly be given wealth and children
19|78|Has he the knowledge of the unseen or has the Beneficent God established such a binding agreement with Him
19|79|Absolutely not, We will record his words and prolong his punishment
19|80|All that he speaks of will belong to Us, and he will come into Our presence all alone
19|81|They have sought honor from other gods instead of God
19|82|In fact, they can have no honor; their gods will renounce their worship of idols and will turn against them
19|83|Do you not realize that We have sent Satan to incite the unbelievers to sin
19|84|(Muhammad), exercise patience; We have given them respite only for an appointed time
19|85|On the Day of Judgment, when the pious people will be brought into the presence of the Beneficent God as the guests of honor
19|86|and the criminals will be driven and thrown into hell
19|87|no one will be able to intercede for the others except those whom the Beneficent God has given authority
19|88|They have said that the Beneficent God has given birth to a son
19|89|This is certainly a monstrous lie
19|90|This would almost cause the heavens to rent apart, the earth to cleave asunder and the mountains to crumble down in fragments
19|91|to ascribe a son to the Beneficent God
19|92|The Beneficent God is too Exalted to have a son
19|93|All that is in the heavens and the earth will return to the Beneficent God as His submissive servants
19|94|He has counted and enumerated them one by one
19|95|Everyone on the Day of Judgment will individually come into the presence of God
19|96|To the righteously striving believers God will grant love
19|97|(Muhammad), We have given you the Book (the Quran) in your own language so that you could easily give the glad news to the pious ones and warn the quarrelsome ones
19|98|How many generations living before them did We destroy? Do you find anyone of them around or do you even hear any word from them
20|1|Ta Ha
20|2|We have sent the Quran only as reminder
20|3|for those who have fear (of disobeying God), not to make you, (Muhammad), miserable
20|4|It is a revelation from the Creator of the earth and the high heavens
20|5|The Beneficent God is dominant over the Throne (of the realm)
20|6|To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth, all that lies between them, and lies below the earth
20|7|Whether or not you express (your thoughts) in words, God certainly knows all unspoken thoughts and all that is even more difficult to find
20|8|God is the only Lord and to Him belong all the exalted Names
20|9|(Muhammad), have you heard the story of Moses
20|10|When he saw the fire, he said to his family, "Wait here for I can see a fire. Perhaps I shall bring you a burning torch or find a way to some fire
20|11|When he came near the fire he was called, "Moses
20|12|I Am your Lord. Take off your shoes; you are in the holy valley of Tuwa
20|13|I have chosen you as My Messengers. Listen to the revelation
20|14|I Am the only God. Worship Me and be steadfast in prayer to have My name always in your mind
20|15|Although it is certain that the Day of Judgment will come, I prefer to keep it almost a secret so that every soul will receive the recompense for what it has done (on its own)
20|16|Let not the unbelievers who follow their vain desires make you forget the Day of Judgment, lest you will perish
20|17|The Lord asked, "Moses, what is in your right hand
20|18|He replied, "It is my staff. I lean on it, bring down leaves for my sheep with it and I need it for other reasons
20|19|The Lord said, "Moses, throw it on the ground
20|20|Moses threw it on the ground and suddenly he saw that it was a moving serpent
20|21|The Lord said, "Hold the serpent and do not be afraid; We will bring it back to its original form
20|22|Now - as another Sign - place your hand under your arm and it will come out sheer white without harm (or stain)
20|23|This We have done to show you some of Our greater miracles
20|24|Go to the Pharaoh; he has become a rebel
20|25|Moses said, "Lord, grant me courage
20|26|Make my task easy
20|27|and my tongue fluent
20|28|so that they may understand me
20|29|Appoint a deputy (for me) from my own people
20|30|Let it be my brother Aaron
20|31|to support me
20|32|Let him be my partner in this task
20|33|so that we may glorify
20|34|and remember you often
20|35|You are Well Aware of our situation
20|36|The Lord said, "Moses, your request is granted
20|37|It is the second time that We have bestowed upon you Our favor
20|38|Remember when We inspired your mother with a certain inspiration
20|39|to lace her child in a chest and throw it into the sea which would hurl it towards the shore. Then an enemy of Mine who was also the enemy of the child would pick it up from there. I made you attractive and loveable so that you would be reared before My own eyes
20|40|Your sister went to them and said, "May I show you someone who will nurse this child?" We returned you to your mother to make her rejoice and forget her grief. You slew a man and We saved you from trouble. We tried you through various trials. Then you stayed some years with the people of Midian (Shu'ayb and his family) and after that you came back to Egypt as was ordained
20|41|I chose you for Myself
20|42|Go with your brother. Take My miracles and do not be reluctant in preaching My message
20|43|Go both of you to the Pharaoh; he has become a rebel
20|44|Both of you must speak with him in a gentle manner so that perhaps he may come to himself or have fear (of God)
20|45|They said, "Lord, we are afraid of his transgression and rebellion against us
20|46|The Lord replied them, "Do not be afraid; I Am with you all the time, listening and seeing
20|47|They came to the Pharaoh and told him that they were the Messengerss of his Lord and that they wanted him to let the Israelites go with them and stop afflicting the Israelites with torment. They told the Pharaoh, "We have brought miracles from Our Creator. Peace be with those who follow the right guidance
20|48|It is revealed to us that those who call our message a lie or turn away from it will face the torment
20|49|The Pharaoh asked them, "Who is your Lord
20|50|They replied, "Our Lord is the One Who has created all things and has given guidance
20|51|He then asked, "What do you know about the past generations
20|52|Moses replied, "The knowledge about it is with my Lord in the Book. My Lord is free from error and forgetfulness
20|53|It is God who has made the earth as a cradle for you with roads for you to travel. He has sent water from the sky to produce various pairs of plants
20|54|Consume them as food or for grazing your cattle. In this there is evidence (of the existence of God) for the people of reason
20|55|We have created you from the earth to which We will return you and will bring you back to life again
20|56|We showed the Pharaoh all of Our miracles, but he called them lies and turned away from them
20|57|He said to Moses, "Have you come to expel us from our land through your magic
20|58|We shall also answer you by magic. Let us make an appointment for a contest among us and let each of us be present at a certain time in the appointed place
20|59|Moses said, "Let the contest take place on the Day of Feast so that all the people can come together during the brightness of the day
20|60|The Pharaoh returned to organize his plans and then attended the appointment
20|61|Moses told them, (the magicians) "Woe to you if you invent falsehood against God; you will be destroyed by the torment. Whoever invents falsehood against God will certainly be lost
20|62|They started arguing and whispering to each other
20|63|and said, "These two people are magicians. They want to expel you from your land through their magic and to destroy your own tradition
20|64|Bring together your devices and come forward in ranks; the winner will, certainly, have great happiness
20|65|They said, "Moses, would you be the first to show your skill or should we be the first to throw down our devices
20|66|Moses said, "You throw first." When they did, their ropes and staffs through their magic seemed to be moving
20|67|Moses felt afraid within himself
20|68|We told him, "Do not be afraid for you will be the winner
20|69|Throw down what is in your right hand and it will swallow up all that they have performed; theirs is only a magical performance. Magicians can find no happiness in whatever they do
20|70|The magicians bowed down in prostration saying, "We believe in the Lord of Moses and Aaron
20|71|The Pharaoh said, "Since you believed in him without my permission, then Moses certainly must be your chief who has taught you magic. I shall cut your hands and feet on alternate sides and crucify you on the trunk of the palm-tree. You shall certainly find which among us can afflict a more severe and lasting punishment
20|72|They (the magicians) said, "We would never prefer you to the miracles that we have seen or to our Creator. Do what you want. This life is only for a short time
20|73|We have faith in our Lord so that He will forgive our sins and our magical performances that you forced us to show. God is better than all things and His rewards last longer
20|74|The dwelling place of one who comes into the presence of his Lord as a criminal will be hell wherein he will never die nor enjoy his life
20|75|One who comes into the presence of his Lord with faith and righteous deeds
20|76|will be rewarded by high status in the gardens of Eden wherein streams flow. Such will be the reward of those who purify themselves
20|77|We sent revelations to Moses telling him, "Travel with My servants during the night and strike a dry road across the sea (for them). Have no fear of being overtaken (by the Pharaoh) nor of anything else
20|78|The Pharaoh and his army chased Moses and his people but were drowned by the sea
20|79|The Pharaoh and his people had gone away from guidance
20|80|Children of Israel, We saved you from your enemy and promised to settle you on the right side of the peaceful Mount Tur (Sinai)
20|81|and We sent you manna and quails
20|82|I allowed you to consume the pure sustenance which We had given you but not to become rebels, lest you become subject to My wrath. Whoever becomes subject to My wrath will certainly be destroyed. I am All-forgiving to the righteously striving believers who repent and follow the right guidance
20|83|The Lord asked, "Moses, what made you attend your appointment with Me before your people
20|84|Moses replied, "They are just behind me. I came earlier to seek Your pleasure
20|85|The Lord said, "We tested your people after you left them and the Samiri made them go astray
20|86|Moses, sad and angry, returned to his people saying, "My people, did not the Lord make you a gracious promise? Why did you disregard your appointment with me? Was it because of the long time or did you want to become subject to the wrath of your Lord
20|87|They replied, "We did not go against our promise with you out of our own accord. We were forced to carry people's ornaments. We threw them away and so did the Samiri
20|88|Then the Samiri forged the body of a motionless calf which gave out a hollow sound." The people said, "This is your Lord and the Lord of Moses whom he (Moses) forgot to mention
20|89|Did they not consider that the calf could not give them any answer, nor it could harm or benefit them
20|90|Aaron had told them before, "My people, you are deceived by the calf. Your Lord is the Beneficent God. Follow me and obey my orders
20|91|They said, "We shall continue worshipping the calf until Moses comes back
20|92|Then Moses asked Aaron, "What made you not follow me when you saw them in error
20|93|Did you disobey my orders
20|94|Aaron replied, "Son of my mother, do not seize me by my beard or head. I was afraid that you might consider me responsible for causing discord among the children of Israel and would not pay attention to my words
20|95|Moses asked, "Samiri, what were your motives
20|96|He replied, "I had the skill (of carving) which they did not have. I followed some of the Messengers's (Moses) tradition, but I then ignored it. Thus, my soul prompted me (to carve a golden calf with an artificial hollow sound)
20|97|Moses said, "Go away! Throughout your life you will not be able to let anyone touch you. This will be your punishment in this life. The time for your final punishment is inevitable. You will never be able to avoid it. Look at your god which you have been worshipping. We will burn it in the fire and scatter its ashes into the sea
20|98|Your Lord is the One who is the only God and He has the knowledge of all things
20|99|Thus We tell you, (Muhammad), the stories of the past and We have given you the Quran
20|100|Whoever disregards (the Quran) will be heavily burdened with sin on the Day of Judgment
20|101|with which he will live forever. On the Day of Judgment it will be a terrible load for him to carry
20|102|On the day when the trumpet will be sounded We will raise the criminals from their graves and their eyes will be turned blue and blind
20|103|They will slowly talk to each other and say, "Our life on earth was as short as ten days
20|104|We know best what they say. The moderate ones among them will say, "You did not live on earth for more than a day
20|105|(Muhammad), they will ask you about the mountains. Tell them, "My Lord will grind them to powder
20|106|and leave them so smoothly levelled
20|107|that you will see no depression or elevation in it
20|108|On that day they will follow their caller without deviation. Their voices will be low in the presence of the Beneficent God. You will hear nothing but the tread of the marching feet
20|109|On that day no one's intercession will be of any benefit unless he has received permission from the Beneficent God and whose word is acceptable to Him
20|110|God knows all that is in front of them and behind them and they can not encompass His knowledge
20|111|Faces will be humble before the Everlasting and the Self-existing God. Despair will strike those who are loaded with the burden of injustice
20|112|The righteously striving believers should have no fear of being treated with injustice or inequity
20|113|We have revealed the Quran in the Arabic language containing various warnings so that it may cause them to have fear (of God) or take heed
20|114|God is the Most High and the True King. (Muhammad), do not be hasty in reading the Quran to the people before the revelation has been completed. "Say, My Lord, grant me more knowledge
20|115|We had commanded Adam (certain matters). He forgot Our commandment and We did not find in him the determination to fulfil Our commandments
20|116|When We told the angels to prostrate before Adam they all obeyed except Iblis (satan) who refused
20|117|We said, "Adam, this (satan) is your enemy and the enemy of your spouse. Let him not expel you and your spouse from Paradise lest you plunge into misery
20|118|In Paradise you will experience no hunger, nakedness
20|119|thirst, or exposure to the hot Sun
20|120|Satan, trying to seduce him, said, "Adam, do you want me to show you the Tree of Eternity and the Everlasting Kingdom
20|121|Adam and his wife ate (fruits) from the tree and found themselves naked. Then they started to cover themselves with the leaves from the garden. Adam disobeyed his Lord and went astray
20|122|His Lord forgave him, accepted his repentance, and gave him guidance
20|123|God then told them, "Get out of here all of you; you are each other's enemies. When My guidance comes to you, those who follow it will not go astray nor will they endure any misery
20|124|Whoever ignores My guidance will live a woeful life and will be brought in Our presence blind on the Day of Judgment
20|125|He will say, "My Lord, why have you brought me back to life blind; before I could see
20|126|The Lord will say, "This is true. But just as you forgot Our revelations that had come to you, so, too, are you forgotten on this day
20|127|Thus We recompense those who are unjust and have no faith in Our revelations. The torment in the life to come will be more severe and last longer
20|128|Is it not a warning for them to see how many generations living before them We destroyed and how they are now walking in their ruins? In this there is the evidence (of the Truth) for the people of reason
20|129|Had not the word of your Lord been decreed (otherwise), the unbelievers deserved immediate punishment. The appointed time for their punishment will inevitably come
20|130|(Muhammad), have patience with what they say, glorify your Lord, and always praise Him before sunrise, sunset, in some hours of the night and at both the beginning and end of the day, so that perhaps you will please your Lord
20|131|Do not be envious of what We have given to some people as means of enjoyment and worldly delight. Such means are a trial for them, but the reward that you will receive from your Lord will be far better and everlasting
20|132|Instruct your family to pray and to be steadfast in their worship. We do not ask any sustenance from you; it is We who give you sustenance. Know that piety will have a happy end
20|133|They have said, "Why has he, (Muhammad), not brought some miracle from his Lord?" Have they not received the previously revealed heavenly Books as the evidence of the Truth
20|134|Had We destroyed them with a torment before the coming of Muhammad they would have said, "Lord, would that you had sent us a Messengers so that we could have followed Your revelations before being humiliated and disgraced
20|135|(Muhammad), tell them, "Everyone is waiting. Wait and you shall know very soon who will be the followers of the right path with the right guidance
21|1|The people's day of reckoning is drawing closer, yet they are heedlessly neglectful
21|2|Whenever a new revelation comes to them from their Lord, they listen to it in a playful manner
21|3|and their hearts are preoccupied with trivial matters. The unjust ones whisper to each other and say, "Is he (Muhammad) more than a mere mortal like you? How can you follow that which you know is only a magic
21|4|The Lord said, "Tell them (Muhammad), 'My Lord knows all that is said in the heavens and the earth. He is All-hearing and All-knowing
21|5|They have said, "It, (the Quran), is only the result of some confused dreams. He is only a poet. He should show us some miracles, as the ancient Prophets had done
21|6|The people of the town whom We had destroyed also had no faith. Will these people then believe in God
21|7|The messengers that We had sent before you were only men to whom We had given revelation. Ask the People of the Book if you do not know
21|8|We had not made them such bodies that would not eat any food nor were they immortal
21|9|Our promise to them came true and We saved them and those whom We wanted, but destroyed the unjust people
21|10|We have sent a Book, (the Quran), which is an honor for you. Will you then not understand
21|11|How many unjust towns did We destroy and replace them with other nations
21|12|When they found Our torment approaching them they started to run away from the town
21|13|We told them, "Do not run away. Come back to your luxuries and your houses so that you can be questioned
21|14|They said, "Woe to us! We have been unjust
21|15|Such was what they continued to say until We mowed them down and made them completely extinct
21|16|We did not create the heavens and the earth just for fun
21|17|Had We wanted to play games, We could have certainly done so with things at hand
21|18|We bring forward the Truth to crush and destroy falsehood; it is doomed to be banished. Woe to you for your way of thinking about God
21|19|To Him belongs all those who are in the heavens and the earth. Those who are closer to Him are not too proud to worship Him, nor do they get tired of worshipping
21|20|They glorify Him day and night without fail
21|21|Have they chosen deities from earth? Can such deities give life to anyone
21|22|Had there been other deities in the heavens and the earth besides God, both the heavens and the earth would have been destroyed. God, the Lord of the Throne, is too Glorious to be as they think He is
21|23|He will not be questioned about anything He does, but all people will be questioned about their deeds
21|24|Have they chosen other gods besides God? (Muhammad), ask them, "Show the proof (in support of such belief). This is (the Quran) which tells us about the (beliefs of the people) in my time and those who lived before me." Most of them do not know. Moreover, the truth is that they neglect (the question of belief altogether)
21|25|To all the Messengers that were sent before you We revealed that I am the only God to be worshipped
21|26|They said, "The Beneficent God has given birth to a son. He is too Exalted to give birth to a son." (Those whom they think are God's sons) are only His honorable servants
21|27|These servants do not speak before He speaks. They simply act according to His orders
21|28|He knows all that is in front of them and all that is behind them. (These servants of God) will not intercede with Him for anyone without His permission and they tremble in awe (before His greatness)
21|29|The recompense of those of them who say that they are the Lord instead of God will be hell; thus, do We recompense the unjust ones
21|30|Have the unbelievers not ever considered that the heavens and the earth were one piece and that We tore them apart from one another. From water We have created all living things. Will they then have no faith
21|31|We placed firm mountains on earth lest it would shake them away. We made wide roads for them so that they might have the right guidance
21|32|We made the sky above them as a well-guarded ceiling, but they have neglected the evidence (of Our existence) therein
21|33|It is God who has created the night, the day, the Sun, and Moon and has made them swim in a certain orbit
21|34|We made no mortal before you immortal. Will they become immortal after you die
21|35|Every soul has to experience the taste of death. We test you with both hardships and blessings. In the end you will all return to Us
21|36|(Muhammad), whenever the unbelievers see you, they think that you deserve nothing more than to be mocked. They say, "Is it he, (Muhammad), who speaks against your gods?" But they themselves have no faith at all in the Beneficent God
21|37|The human being is created hasty. Tell them, "Do not be hasty, for God will soon show you the evidence of His existence
21|38|They say, "When shall the Day of Judgment come to pass if you are true in your claim
21|39|Would that the unbelievers knew that no one would protect their faces and backs against the fire, nor they would be helped
21|40|The fire will suddenly strike and confound them. They will not be able to repel it, nor will they be given any respite
21|41|They mocked the Messengers who were sent before you; thus, the torment which they had ridiculed encompassed them all
21|42|Ask them, "Who can protect them from (the wrath of) the Beneficent God during the night and day?" Yet they are neglectful about their Lord
21|43|Can their gods protect them against Us? Their gods have no power even to help themselves, nor are they safe from Our retribution
21|44|We have been providing these men and their fathers with the means of enjoyment for a long time. Have they not ever considered that We populated the earth and then caused many of the inhabitants to pass away? Can they have any success (in their wickedness)
21|45|(Muhammad), tell them, "I am warning you by revelation alone." The deaf do not hear any call when they are warned
21|46|If a blast of the torment of your Lord strikes them, they will say, "Woe to us! We have been unjust people
21|47|We shall maintain proper justice on the Day of Judgment. No soul will be wronged the least. For a deed even as small as a mustard seed one will duly be recompensed. We are efficient in maintaining the account
21|48|To Moses and Aaron We granted the criteria of discerning right from wrong, and We gave them the light and a reminder to the pious ones
21|49|who fear their unseen Lord and are anxious about the Day of Judgment
21|50|This (Quran) which We have revealed is a blessed reminder. Will you then deny it
21|51|To Abraham We gave the right guidance and We knew him very well
21|52|Abraham asked his father and his people, "What are these statues which you worship
21|53|They replied, "We found our fathers worshipping them
21|54|He said, "Both you and your fathers have certainly been in error
21|55|They exclaimed, "Have you brought the Truth or are you joking
21|56|He said, "Your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth. It was He who created them and I testify to this fact
21|57|Abraham said to himself, "By God! I will devise a plan against their idols when they are away
21|58|He broke all the idols into pieces, except the biggest among them so that perhaps people would refer to it
21|59|(When the people came to the temple and saw the broken idols) they asked each other, "Who has done this to our gods? He certainly is an unjust person
21|60|Some of them said, "We heard a youth called Abraham speaking against the idols
21|61|Their chiefs said, "Bring him before the eyes of the people and let them testify that he has spoken against the idols
21|62|They asked, "Abraham, did you do this to our idols
21|63|He replied, "I think the biggest among them has broken the smaller ones. Ask them if they are able to speak
21|64|Thereupon they realized their own foolishness and said, "We ourselves are wrong-doers
21|65|With their heads cast down they said, "Abraham, you know that idols do not speak. How then can you ask such a question
21|66|He said, "Do you, instead of God, worship things that can neither harm nor benefit you
21|67|Woe to you for what you worship instead of God. Have you no understanding
21|68|They said, "Burn him to ashes if you want to help your gods
21|69|We said to the fire, "Be cool and peaceful (with Abraham)
21|70|They had devised an evil plan (against Abraham), but We turned it into failure
21|71|We took Abraham and Lot safely to the land in which We had sent blessings to the worlds
21|72|We granted him Isaac and Jacob as a gift and helped both of them to become righteous people
21|73|We appointed them as leaders to guide the people through Our command and sent them revelation to strive for good deeds, worship their Lord, and pay religious tax. Both of them were Our worshipping servants
21|74|To Lot We gave knowledge and wisdom and saved him from the people of the town who were committing indecent acts. They were certainly a bad and sinful people
21|75|We encompassed him in Our mercy; he was a righteous man
21|76|We answered the prayer of Noah who had prayed to Us before and saved him and his followers from the great disaster
21|77|We helped him against the people who said Our revelations were mere lies. They were a bad people and We drowned them all
21|78|David and Solomon were trying to settle the case of the people's sheep that grazed in a corn-field at night. We witnessed their decree in that matter
21|79|We made Solomon understand the law about the case and gave both David and Solomon knowledge and wisdom. We made the mountains and birds glorify the Lord along with David. We had also done to him such favors before
21|80|We taught him the art of making coats of mail so that you could protect yourselves during a war. Will you then give thanks
21|81|We made subservient to Solomon the swift wind that blew on his command to the land in which We had sent blessings. We have the knowledge of all things
21|82|We subdued the devils who would dive into the sea for him and perform other tasks for Solomon. We kept them in his service
21|83|When Job prayed, "Lord, I have been afflicted with hardships. Have mercy on me; You are the Most Merciful of those who have mercy
21|84|We answered his prayer, relieved him from his hardships, brought his family (back to him) and gave him twice as much property as that (which was destroyed). It was a mercy from Us and a reminder for the worshippers
21|85|Ismael, Idris and Dhul Kifl all were people of great patience
21|86|We encompassed them in Our mercy; they were righteous people
21|87|Dhun Nun went away in anger and thought that We would never have power over him, but in darkness he cried, "Lord, You are the Only God whom I glorify. I have certainly done wrong to myself (so forgive me)
21|88|We answered his prayer and saved him from his grief. Thus We save the faithful ones
21|89|Zachariah prayed, "Lord, do not leave me alone without offspring, although you are the best heir
21|90|We answered his prayer and granted him his son, John, by making his wife fruitful. They were people who would compete with each other in good deeds and pray to Us with love and reverence. With Us they were all humble people
21|91|Into the woman who maintained her chastity We breathed Our Spirit and made her and her son a miracle for all people
21|92|People, you are one nation and I am your Lord. Worship Me
21|93|People have divided themselves into many sects, but all will return to Us
21|94|The reward of the righteously striving believers will not be neglected. We are keeping the record of their good deeds
21|95|The people whom We destroyed can never return to this world
21|96|until Gog and Magog are let loose to rush down from the hills
21|97|The Day of Judgment will then draw near and the unbelievers will stare amazedly and cry, "Woe to us! We had neglected this day. We have done wrong
21|98|They will be told, "You and what you had worshipped instead of God will be the fuel of hell
21|99|Had the idols been true lords, they would not have gone to hell. "All of you will live therein forever
21|100|They will groan in pain therein, but no one will listen to them
21|101|But those to whom We have already promised blessings will be far away from hell
21|102|They will not even hear the slightest sound from it while enjoying the best that they can wish for in their everlasting life
21|103|They will not be affected by the great terror. The angels will come to them with this glad news: "This is your day which was promised to you
21|104|(This will happen) on the day when We roll up the heavens as if it were a written scroll and bring it back into existence just as though We had created it for the first time. This is what We have promised and We have always been true to Our promise
21|105|We have written in the psalms which We had revealed after the Torah that the earth will be given to Our righteous servants as their inheritance
21|106|This is a lesson for those who worship (God)
21|107|(Muhammad), We have sent you for no other reason but to be a mercy for mankind
21|108|Say, "It is revealed to me that there is only one Lord. Will you then submit yourselves to His will
21|109|If they turn away, tell them, "I have warned every one of you equally. I do not know when the torment which you have to suffer will take place
21|110|God knows well all that is spoken aloud and all that you hide
21|111|I do not know (why God has commanded me to warn you of the torment). Perhaps it is a trial for you and a respite for an appointed time
21|112|He also said, "Lord, judge (us) with Truth. Our Lord is the Beneficent One whose help I ask against the blasphemies you say about Him
22|1|People, have fear of your Lord; the quake (of the physical realm) at the Hour of Doom will be terribly violent
22|2|When that hour comes, every breast-feeding mother will drop her baby out of fear and every pregnant female will cast off her burden. You will see the people behaving as though they were drunk, while, in fact, they are not drunk. They only will look such because of the severity of God's torment
22|3|Some people argue about God without knowledge and follow every rebellious devil
22|4|It has been decided that satan will mislead and submit anyone who establishes friendship with him to the torment of the burning fire
22|5|People, if you have doubts about the Resurrection, you must know that We created you from clay that was turned into a living germ. This was developed into a clot of blood, which was made into a well formed and partly shapeless lump of flesh. This is how We show you that resurrection is not more difficult for Us than your creation. We cause whatever We want to stay in the womb for an appointed time, We then take you out of the womb as a baby, so that you may grow up and receive strength. Some of you may then die and others may grow to a very old age and lose your memory. You may see the earth as a barren land, but when we send rain, it starts to stir and swell and produce various pairs of attractive herbs
22|6|This is because God is the Supreme Truth who gives life to the dead and who has power over all things
22|7|There is no doubt about the coming of the Hour of Doom and that God will raise every one from their graves
22|8|Some people argue about God without knowledge, guidance, and an enlightening Book
22|9|They turn away (from the Truth) to lead people away from the path of God. Their share in this world will be disgrace and on the Day of Judgment a burning torment
22|10|(They will be told), "This is the result of what your hands have wrought. God is certainly not unjust to His servants
22|11|Some people worship God to achieve worldly gains. They are confident when they are prosperous, but when they face hardships they turn away from (worship). They are lost in this life and will be lost in the life to come. Such loss is indeed destructive
22|12|They worship things instead of God which can neither harm them nor benefit them. This is indeed to stray far away from the right path
22|13|Their worship of such things, in which there is no hope for any benefit, can only harm them. How terrible is such a guardian and companion
22|14|God will admit the righteously striving believers to the gardens wherein streams flow. God has all the power to do whatever He wants
22|15|Those who thought that God would never grant victory to (Muhammad), in this world nor in the life hereafter (and now that he is victorious) should hang themselves by the necks from the ceiling, then cut the rope and see if this can do away with what has enraged them
22|16|We have revealed the Quran which contains authoritative verses. God guides only those whom He wants
22|17|On the Day of Judgment, God will make truth and falsehood clearly distinct from each other to the believers, the Jews, the Sabeans, the Christian, the Zoroastrians, and the Pagans on the Day of Judgment. God is a Witness to all things
22|18|Have you not considered that those in the heavens and the earth, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the mountains, the trees, the animals, and many people, all bow down to God? But many people deserve His torment. No one can give honor to whomever God has insulted. God has all the power to do what He wants
22|19|(Those who prostrate themselves before God and those who do not) are two groups who dispute with each other about their Lord. For the unbelievers the garment of fire has already been prepared. Boiling water will be poured upon their heads
22|20|It will melt their skins and all that is in their bellies
22|21|They will be subdued by iron rods
22|22|Whenever in anguish they will try to come out of hell they will be returned therein to suffer the burning torment
22|23|God will admit the righteously striving believers to the gardens wherein streams flow. There they will be decked with gold bracelets, pearls, and garments of silk
22|24|for they were guided to speak the noblest words and follow the praiseworthy path
22|25|A painful torment awaits the pagans who create obstacles in the way that leads to God and the Sacred Mosque - which We have made for those who dwell nearby and foreigners alike - and those who commit evil and injustice therein
22|26|When We prepared for Abraham the place to build the Sacred House, We told him not to consider anything equal to Me and to keep the House clean for those walking around it, those standing, bowing down, and prostrating in prayer
22|27|(We commanded Abraham), "Call people for hajj - an act of worship accomplished by visiting the sacred sites in Mecca." They will come on foot and on lean camels from all the distant quarters
22|28|to see their benefits, commemorate the name of God during the appointed days, and offer the sacrifice of the cattle that God has given them. They themselves should consume part of the sacrificial flesh and give the rest to the destitute and needy people
22|29|Let the pilgrims then neatly dress themselves, fulfil their vows, and walk seven times around the Kabah
22|30|Such are the regulations of hajj. To respect the prohibitions of God is a virtuous deed in the sight of one's Lord. Consuming the flesh of certain animals is made lawful for you. Stay away from wickedness, idols, and false words
22|31|As the upright servants of God, do not consider anything equal to God. To consider things equal to God is like one falling from the sky who is snatched away by the birds or carried away by a strong wind to a far distant place
22|32|To respect the symbols of God is the sign of a pious heart
22|33|There are benefits for you in the (sacrificial offerings) of God until the appointed time when you slaughter them as your offering near the Ancient House
22|34|To every nation We have given certain sacrificial rituals. Let them consecrate their sacrificial animals with His Name. Your God is One God and you must submit yourselves to His will. (Muhammad), give the glad news (of God's mercy) to the devoted servants of God
22|35|Those whose hearts are filled with awe on hearing about God, who exercise patience in hardships, who are steadfast in prayer, and who spend their property for the cause of God
22|36|For you We have made the sacrificial camel one of the reminders of God. It also has other benefits for you. Consecrate it with the Name of God when it is steadily standing. When it is slaughtered, consume its flesh and give part of it to the needy who do and those do not ask for help from others. Thus We have made the camel subservient to you so that perhaps you may give thanks
22|37|It is not the flesh and blood of your sacrifice that pleases God. What pleases God is your piety. God has made subservient to you the sacrificial animals so that perhaps you will glorify Him; He is guiding you. (Muhammad), give the glad news (of God's mercy) to the righteous people
22|38|God defends the believers but He does not love any of the treacherous, ungrateful ones
22|39|Permission to take up arms is hereby granted to those who are attacked; they have suffered injustice. God has all the power to give victory
22|40|to those who were unjustly expelled from their homes only because they said, "God is our Lord." Had it not been for God's repelling some people through the might of the others, the monasteries, churches, synagogues, and mosques in which God is very often worshipped would have been utterly destroyed. God shall certainly help those who help Him. He is All-powerful and Majestic
22|41|He will certainly help those who, if given power in the land, will worship God through prayer, pay the religious tax, enjoin others do good, and prevent them from committing evil. The consequence of all things is in the hands of God
22|42|If they have called you, (Muhammad), a liar, (remember that) the people of Noah, Ad, Thamud
22|43|and the people of Abraham, Lot
22|44|Midian, and Moses had also called their Prophets liars. I gave respite to the unbelievers, then sized them with torment. How terrible was that torment
22|45|How many were the unjust dwellers of the towns that We destroyed. From their trellises to their lofty mansions, all were toppled and their wells were abandoned
22|46|Have they not travelled (sufficiently) in the land to have understanding hearts and listening ears? It is their hearts which are blind, not their ears
22|47|They want you to bring upon them their punishment without delay. God never disregards His promise. One day for God is equal to a thousand years for you
22|48|To how many unjust towns have We given respite and then sized with torment. To Me do all things return
22|49|(Muhammad), tell them, "People, I am giving you a clear warning
22|50|The righteously striving believers will receive forgiveness and honorable sustenance
22|51|Those who try to challenge Our miracles will be the dwellers of hell
22|52|Satan would try to tamper with the desires of every Prophet or Messenger whom We sent. Then God would remove Satan's temptations and strengthen His revelations. God is All-knowing and All-wise
22|53|He would make Satan's temptations a trial for those whose hearts are hard and sick. The wrong-doers are far away from the Lord
22|54|so that those who have received knowledge would know and believe that whatever happens with the Prophets and Messengers is the Truth from their Lord and will believe it. This will cause their hearts to become filled with awe. God guides the believers to the right path
22|55|The unbelievers will continue to doubt the Quran until the Hour of Doom suddenly sizes them or the torment of the last day strikes them
22|56|On that day it is God who will be the Absolute King and Judge of (mankind). The righteously striving believers will go to Paradise
22|57|and the unbelievers who called Our revelations lies will suffer humiliating torment
22|58|Those who abandoned their homes for the cause of God and who then died or were murdered will receive honorable sustenance from God; He is the Most Generous and Munificent
22|59|God will certainly admit them to a pleasant dwelling. God is All-knowing and Forbearing
22|60|One who is wronged and who retaliates by that which is equal to his suffering, God will certainly help him; He is All-pardoning and All-forgiving
22|61|God causes the night to enter the day and the day to enter the night. He is All-hearing and All-aware
22|62|God is the Supreme Truth and whatever they worship instead of Him is falsehood. God is most Exalted and most Great
22|63|Have you not seen that God has sent water from the sky and has made the earth green all over. He is Kind and All-aware
22|64|To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. God is Self-sufficient and Praiseworthy
22|65|Have you not seen that God, through His command, has made all that is in the earth and the ships that sail on the sea subservient to you? He prevents the sky from falling on the earth unless He decides otherwise. God is Compassionate and Merciful to mankind
22|66|It is He who has given you life, He will make you die and will make you live again. Surely the human being is ungrateful
22|67|We enjoined every nation with certain worship acts which they perform. The unbelievers must not dispute with you about the manner of your worship. Invite them to follow the right path of the Lord
22|68|If they still dispute with you about your worship, tell them, "God knows best what you do
22|69|He will issue His decree about your differences on the Day of Judgment
22|70|Do you not know that God knows all that is in the heavens and the earth? His decree is already recorded in the Book and issuing such a Judgment is not difficult for Him at all
22|71|They worship things instead of God that have received no authority (from the heavens) nor have they any knowledge of such authority. The unjust people will have no one to help them
22|72|When Our authoritative revelations are recited to the unbelievers, you can clearly read the dislike on their faces. They almost attack those who read Our revelations to them. Say to them, "Should I tell you about what is the worst thing for you than these revelations? It is the fire which God has prepared for the unbelievers. What a terrible destination
22|73|People, listen to this parable: Those whom you worship instead of God do not have the power to create even a fly, even though all of them would come together for the task. If the fly was to snatch something from them they would not be able to rescue it from the fly. How feeble are such worshippers and that which they worship
22|74|They have not revered God properly. God is All-powerful and Majestic
22|75|God chooses Messengers from both angels and human beings. God is All-hearing and All-aware
22|76|God knows all that they have and all that is behind them, and to Him do all things return
22|77|Believers, worship your Lord, bow down and prostrate yourselves before Him and do virtuous deeds so that perhaps you will have everlasting happiness
22|78|Strive steadfastly for the Cause of God. He has chosen you but has not imposed on you hardship in your religion, the noble religion of your father, Abraham. God named you Muslims before and in this Book, so that the Messenger will witness (your actions) and will be the witness over mankind. Be steadfast in your prayer, pay the religious tax, and seek protection from God; He is your Guardian, a gracious Guardian and Helper
23|1|Triumphant indeed are the believers
23|2|who are submissive to God in their prayers
23|3|who avoid impious talks
23|4|pay their religious tax
23|5|and restrain their carnal desires
23|6|except with their spouses and slave-girls. The practice of carnal relations is lawful with them
23|7|Those who desire to go beyond such limits they commit transgression
23|8|those who are true to their trust
23|9|to their promise
23|10|and who are steadfast in their prayer
23|11|These are the heirs of Paradise wherein they will live forever
23|12|We have created the human being from an extract of clay
23|13|which was then turned into a living germ and placed in safe depository
23|14|The living germ, then, was turned into a shapeless lump of flesh from which bones were formed. The bones, then, were covered with flesh. At this stage, We caused it to become another creature. All blessings belong to God, the best Creator
23|15|Thereafter you will certainly die
23|16|and you will be brought back to life again on the Day of Resurrection
23|17|We have created seven heavens above you and have never been neglectful to Our Creation
23|18|We have sent a measure of water from the sky to stay on earth and We have the power to take it away
23|19|We have established for you gardens of palm trees and vineyards with this water with many fruits for you to consume
23|20|We have also created for you the tree that grows on Mount Sinai which produces oil and relish for those who use it
23|21|There is a lesson for you concerning cattle. We provide you with drink from their bellies and many other benefits. You can consume them as meat
23|22|You are carried by the animals on land and by the ships in the sea
23|23|We sent Noah to his people who said, "My people, worship God for He is your only Lord. Will you then not have fear of Him
23|24|The chiefs of the unbelievers said to the others, "He is a mere mortal like you. He wants only to be superior to you. Had God wanted He would have sent the angels (instead of him). We have never heard from our fathers anything like what he says
23|25|He is only an insane person. Wait for some time. Perhaps he will come to his senses
23|26|Noah prayed, "Lord, help me; they have called me a liar
23|27|We inspired him, saying, "Build the Ark before Our eyes and by the instruction of Our revelation. When our decree comes to pass and water comes forth from the Oven, embark in the Ark with a pair of every kind of animals and your family except those already doomed (to perish). Do not plead with Me for the unjust; they will be drowned
23|28|When all of you settle in the Ark, say, "Only God Who has saved us from the unjust people deserves all praise
23|29|Say, "Lord, grant us a blessed landing from the Ark; You are the One who provides the safest landing
23|30|In this story there is enough evidence (of the Truth); thus do We try (mankind)
23|31|We brought another generation into existence after the people of Noah
23|32|We sent to them a Messenger from among their own people who told them, "Worship God; He is your only Lord. Will you then not have fear of Him
23|33|A group of his people who disbelieved him and had called the Day of Judgment a lie and whom We had made prosperous in this life, said, "He is a mere mortal like you. He eats and drinks as you do
23|34|If you follow a mortal like yourselves you will certainly be lost
23|35|Does he promise you that after you die and become dust and bones you will be brought back to life again
23|36|Such a promise will never come true
23|37|This is our only life. We live and will die but we will never be brought back to life again
23|38|He is only a man who invents lies against God, so have no faith in him
23|39|The Messenger prayed, "Lord, help me; they have called me a liar
23|40|God replied, "After a very short time they will certainly regret for their deeds
23|41|A blast struck them for a just cause, and We made them look like withered leaves. God keeps the unjust people away from His mercy
23|42|After them We brought another generation into existence
23|43|Every nation has an appointed life span
23|44|We sent Our messengers one after the other but whenever a Messenger would come to a nation, its people would call him a liar and We would destroy one nation after the other, thus, only their stories were left behind them. God keeps the unbelievers far away from His Mercy
23|45|Then We sent Moses and his brother Aaron with Our miracles and clear authority
23|46|to the Pharaoh and his nobles. But they behaved proudly and thought themselves superior people
23|47|They said, "Should we believe in two mere mortals who are like ourselves and whose people are our slaves
23|48|They called them liars and consequently were destroyed
23|49|We gave the Book to Moses so that perhaps they may have guidance
23|50|We made the son of Mary and his mother a miracle and settled them on a high land, quite secure and watered by a spring
23|51|I told them, "Messengers, eat from the pure things and act righteously; I know all that you do
23|52|Your religion is one and I am your Lord. Have fear of Me
23|53|The people divided themselves into many sects, each with their own book and each happy with whatever they had
23|54|(Muhammad), leave them alone in their dark ignorance for an appointed time
23|55|Do they think that We are helping them by giving them children and property
23|56|We provide them with the means of competing with each other in virtuous deeds, but they do not realize this
23|57|Only those who are, out of fear of Him, humble before their Lord
23|58|who believe in the revelations of their Lord
23|59|who consider nothing equal to their Lord
23|60|who spend their property for the cause of God, and whose hearts are afraid of their return
23|61|to God, these are the ones who really compete with each other in virtuous deeds and are the foremost ones in the task
23|62|We do not impose on any soul what is beyond its capacity. We have the Book which speaks the truth and no injustice will be done to it
23|63|In fact, the hearts of the unbelievers are in the dark because of their ignorance of real virtue; they act against it
23|64|But when We will strike with torment those (unbelievers) who are rich, they will start to cry for help
23|65|We shall tell them, "Do not cry for help on this day; you will receive none from Us
23|66|Our revelations had certainly been recited to you, but you turned your backs to them
23|67|and arrogantly mocked and reviled them
23|68|Was it that you did not give any thought to it (the Quran)? Was it different from what was revealed to your fathers
23|69|Or did you not recognize your Messenger and, thus, denied him (Muhammad)
23|70|or you said that he is possessed by satan? In fact, he has brought you the truth, but most of you dislike it
23|71|Had the truth followed their desires, the heavens and the earth and all that is in them would have been destroyed. We sent them the Quran but they ignored it
23|72|(Do they disbelieve because) you asked them for payment? The reward that you will receive from your Lord is the best. He is the best Provider
23|73|(Muhammad), you certainly have called them to the right path
23|74|but those who disbelieve the life hereafter deviate from the right path
23|75|Even if We were to grant them mercy and rescue them from hardship, they would still blindly persist in their rebellion
23|76|We struck them with torment, but they did not submit themselves to their Lord, nor did they make themselves humble
23|77|until We opened the gate of greater torment (death) and they suddenly found themselves in despair
23|78|It is God who has created ears, eyes, and hearts for you. Little are the thanks that you give
23|79|It is God who has settled you on the earth and before Him you will all be assembled
23|80|It is He who gives life and causes death and it is He who alternates night and day. Will you not then understand
23|81|They say exactly the same thing as the people who lived before
23|82|They say, "When we die and become dust and bones, shall we then be raised up again
23|83|Our fathers and we have been given such promises before. These are no more than ancient legends
23|84|(Muhammad), say to them, "Tell me, if you know, to whom does the earth and its contents belong
23|85|They will quickly reply, "It belongs to God." Say, "Will you not, then, take heed
23|86|Ask them, "Who is the Lord of the seven heavens and the Great Throne
23|87|They will quickly say, "It is God." Say, "Will you not then have fear of Him
23|88|Ask them, "If you have any knowledge, in whose hands is the ownership of all things? Who is the one who gives protection and yet He Himself is never protected
23|89|They will reply spontaneously, "It is God." Ask them, "Why has falsehood bewitched you
23|90|We have sent them the truth and they, certainly, are liars
23|91|God has never given birth to a son and there is no other god besides Him. If there were, each god would have taken away his creatures and claimed superiority over the others. God is too exalted to be as they believe Him to be
23|92|He has the knowledge of all seen and unseen things. He is too exalted to be considered equal to anything else
23|93|Say, "Lord, if you will afflict them with punishment
23|94|exclude me from the unjust people
23|95|We have the Power to strike them with torment before your very eyes
23|96|Respond to the injustice (done to you) with the better deed. We know best what they attribute to God
23|97|Say, "Lord, I seek your protection against the strong temptations of the devils
23|98|I seek your protection should they approach me
23|99|When death approaches one of the unbelievers, he says, "Lord, send me back again
23|100|so that perhaps I shall act righteously for the rest of my life." Although he will say so but his wish will never come true. After death they will be behind a barrier until the day of their resurrection
23|101|There will be no kindred relations nor any opportunity to ask about others or seek their assistance after the trumpet has sounded
23|102|If the side of ones good deeds weighs heavier on a scale, he will have everlasting happiness
23|103|but if it weighs less, one will be lost forever in hell
23|104|The fire will scorch their faces and they will be groaning therein in pain
23|105|(They will be told), "Were Our revelations not recited to you and did you not call them lies
23|106|They will reply, "Lord, our hard-heartedness overcame us and we went astray
23|107|Lord, take us out of this and if we sin again, we shall certainly be unjust
23|108|He will say, "Be quiet and say nothing
23|109|There was a group of my servants among you who always prayed: Lord, forgive us and grant us mercy; You are the best of those who show mercy
23|110|You mocked and laughed at them until you forgot all about Me
23|111|On this day I have given them their reward for their exercising patience and it is they who have triumphed
23|112|God will ask them, "How many years did you live in your graves
23|113|They will reply. "We remained for about a day or part of it, but ask those who have kept count
23|114|God will say, "You have indeed remained there for a short time. Would that you knew it during your life time
23|115|Did you think that We had created you for a playful purpose and that you were not to return to Us
23|116|God is the most exalted King and the Supreme Truth. He is the only God and the Lord of the Gracious Throne
23|117|One who worships things besides God has no proof of the authority of such things. God is certainly keeping the record of his deeds. The unbelievers will not have everlasting happiness
23|118|(Muhammad), say, "Lord, forgive me and grant me mercy; You are the best of the Merciful Ones
24|1|This is a chapter which We have revealed to you and made obligatory for you to follow its guidance. We have revealed clear verses in it so that perhaps you may take heed
24|2|Flog the fornicatress and the fornicator with a hundred lashes each. Let there be no reluctance in enforcing the laws of God, if you have faith in God and the Day of Judgment. Let it take place in the presence of a group of believers
24|3|No one should marry a fornicator except a fornicatress or a pagan woman. No one should marry a fornicatress except a fornicator or a pagan man. Such (marriage) is unlawful to the believers
24|4|Those who accuse married women of committing adultery - but are not able to prove their accusation by producing four witness - must be flogged eighty lashes. Never accept their testimony thereafter because they are sinful
24|5|except that of those who afterwards repent and reform themselves; God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
24|6|Those who accuse their spouses of committing adultery but have no witness except themselves, should testify four times saying, "God is my witness that I am telling the truth
24|7|They should say on the fifth time, "Let God's curse be upon me if I am a liar
24|8|The spouse will be acquitted of the punishment if she challenges his testimony by saying four times, "God is my witness that he is a liar
24|9|On the fifth time she should say, "Let the curse of God be upon me if what he says is true
24|10|Had it not been for God's favors and mercy upon you (your life would have been in chaos). God accepts repentance and He is All-wise
24|11|Those of you who have brought forward a false report (against Aisha) do not think that it will harm you. Rather it will be a benefit to you. Each one of you will face the result of his sin. The one among the group who was the chief instigator will face a great torment
24|12|Would that on your hearing this report, the believing men and woman among you had a favorable attitude towards it, and had said, "This report is clearly false
24|13|Would that they had brought four witness to testify to their report. Since they brought none, they are liars before God
24|14|Were it not for the favors and mercy of God upon you, in this world and in the life to come, a great torment would strike you for your involvement in this false report
24|15|Your tongues moved and your mouths spoke of something of which you had no knowledge. You thought it to be a trivial matter, while in the eyes of God it is blasphemy
24|16|Would that on hearing this report, you had said, "We have nothing to say about it. God forbid! It is a serious accusation
24|17|God advises you never to do such things again if you have any faith
24|18|God explains to you His revelations. He is All-knowing and All-wise
24|19|Those who like to publicize indecency among the believers will face painful torment in this world and in the life to come. God knows what you do not know
24|20|Were it not for the favor and mercy of God upon you (you would have faced painful punishment in this world and the life to come). God is Compassionate and Merciful
24|21|Believers, do not follow the footsteps of satan; whoever does so will be made by satan to commit indecency and sin. Were it not for the favor and mercy of God, none of you would ever have been purified. God purifies whomever He wants. God is All-hearing and All-knowing
24|22|The well-to-do and the rich among you should not fail to give to relatives, the destitute, and Emigrants for the cause of God. Be considerate and forgiving. Do you not want God to forgive you? God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
24|23|Those who slander the unaware but chaste and believing women (of committing unlawful carnal relations) are condemned in this life and in the life hereafter. They will suffer a great punishment
24|24|on the day when their tongues, hands, and feet will testify to what they had done
24|25|On that day God will give them due recompense and they will know that God is the Supreme Judge
24|26|Indecent woman are for indecent men and indecent men are for indecent woman. Decent women are for decent men and decent men are for decent women. The decent people are innocent of what people allege. They will receive mercy and honorable sustenance
24|27|Believers, do not enter other's houses until you have asked permission and have greeted the people therein. This is best for you so that perhaps you may remember (God's guidance)
24|28|If you do not find anyone therein, do not enter until you are given permission. If you are told to go away, do so; this is more decent of you. God knows all that you do
24|29|There is no harm for you to enter uninhabited houses where you have some goods. God knows whatever you reveal or hide
24|30|(Muhammad), tell the believing men to cast down their eyes and guard their carnal desires; this will make them more pure. God is certainly aware of what they do
24|31|Tell the believing woman to cast down their eyes, guard their chastity, and not to show off their beauty except what is permitted by the law. Let them cover their breasts with their veils. They must not show off their beauty to anyone other than their husbands, father, father-in-laws, sons, step-sons, brothers, sons of brothers and sisters, women of their kind, their slaves, immature male servants, or immature boys. They must not stamp their feet to show off their hidden ornaments. All of you believers, turn to God in repentance so that perhaps you will have everlasting happiness
24|32|Marry the single people among you and the righteous slaves and slave-girls. If you are poor, God will make you rich through His favor; He is Bountiful and All-knowing
24|33|Let those who cannot find someone to marry maintain chastity until God makes them rich through His favors. Let the slaves who want to buy their freedom have an agreement with you in writing if you find them to be virtuous. Give them money out of God's property which He has given to you. Do not force your girls into prostitution to make money if they want to be chaste. If they have been compelled to do so, God will be All-merciful and All-forgiving to them
24|34|We have revealed to you illustrious revelations, stories of the past generations, and good advice for the pious people
24|35|God is the light of the heavens and the earth. A metaphor for His light is a niche in which there is a lamp placed in a glass. The glass is like a shining star which is lit from a blessed olive tree that is neither eastern nor western. Its oil almost lights up even though it has not been touched by the fire. It is light upon light. God guides to His light whomever He wants. God uses various metaphors. He has the knowledge of all things
24|36|(This niche) is in the houses that God has declared to be highly respected and His Name be mentioned therein in glory in the morning and evening
24|37|by people, who can neither be diverted by merchandise nor bargaining from worshipping God, saying their prayers and paying religious tax. They do these things, for they are afraid of the day when all hearts and eyes will undergo terrible unrest and crisis
24|38|(They worship Him) so that God will reward their best deeds and give them more through His favors. God gives sustenance to whomever He wants without account
24|39|The deeds of the unbelievers are like a mirage which a thirsty man thinks is water until he goes near and finds nothing. Instead he finds God who gives him his due recompense. God's reckoning is swift
24|40|Or it (the deeds of the unbelievers) are like the darkness of a deep, stormy sea with layers of giant waves, covered by dark clouds. It is darkness upon darkness whereby even if one stretches out his hands he can not see them. One can have no light unless God gives him light
24|41|Have you not considered that all that is between the heavens and the earth glorifies God and that the birds spread their wings in the air to glorify God? He knows everyone's prayers and praising; God has absolute knowledge of what they do
24|42|To God belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and to Him do all things return
24|43|Do you not see that God moves the clouds gently, brings them together, piles them up, and then you can see the rain coming from them. He sends down hailstones from the mountains in the sky. With them He strikes or protects from them whomever He wants. The lightening can almost take away the sight
24|44|God alternates the night and the day. In this there is a lesson for the people of understanding
24|45|God has created every living being from water: Some of them creep on their bellies; some walk on two feet and some of them walk on four legs. God creates whatever He wants. He has power over all things
24|46|We have revealed illustrious revelations. God guides to the right path whomever He wants
24|47|They say, "We have believed in God and the Messenger and we have obeyed them." Then a group of them turn away from their (belief). They are not believers
24|48|When they are called to God and His Messenger so that they will judge among them, suddenly, some of them turn away
24|49|If right was on their side, they would come quickly
24|50|Are their hearts sick? Do they have doubts or are they afraid that God and His Messenger may do injustice to them? In fact, they, themselves, are unjust
24|51|When the believers are called to God and His Messenger to be judged, their only words are, "We have listened and obeyed." They will have everlasting happiness
24|52|Those who obey God and His Messenger, who are humble before Him, and who have fear of Him will, certainly, be successful
24|53|They strongly swear by God that they would march to fight (for the cause of God) if you were to order them to. Tell them, "You do not need to swear; fighting for the cause of God is a virtuous deed and God is Well Aware of what you do
24|54|Say to them, "Obey God and His Messenger. If you turn away, the Messenger and the people will each be responsible for their own obligations. If you follow the Messenger, you will have the right guidance. The responsibility of the Messenger is only to preach
24|55|God has promised the righteously striving believers to appoint them as His deputies on earth, as He had appointed those who lived before. He will make the religion that He has chosen for them to stand supreme. He will replace their fear with peace and security so that they will worship God alone and consider no one equal to Him. Whoever becomes an unbeliever after this will be a sinful person
24|56|Be steadfast in prayer, pay the religious tax and obey the Messenger so that perhaps you will receive mercy
24|57|The unbelievers should not think that they can defeat God on earth. Their dwelling will be hell, the most terrible abode
24|58|Believers, your slaves and the immature people must ask your permission three times a day before entering your house: before the morning prayer, at noon time and after the late evening prayer; these are most private times. After your permission has been granted, there is no harm if they come into your presence from time to time. This is how God explains His revelations to you. God is All-knowing and All-wise
24|59|When your children become mature, they must ask your permission before entering your house, as the rest of the mature people do. Thus does God explain to you His revelations. God is All-knowing and All-wise
24|60|Elderly women who have no hope of getting married are allowed not to wear the kind of clothing that young woman must wear, as long as they do not show off their beauty. It is better for them if they maintain chastity. God is All-hearing and All-knowing
24|61|It is no sin for the blind, the lame, the sick ones, and yourselves to eat at your own homes, or the homes of your father, mothers, brothers, sisters, your paternal and maternal uncles, aunts, or at the homes of your friend, and the homes with which you are entrusted. It makes no difference whether you eat all together or one person at a time. When you enter a house, say the blessed greeting which God has instructed you to say. Thus does God explain to you His revelations so that perhaps you will understand
24|62|The true believers are those who have faith in God and His Messenger and when they are dealing with the Messenger in important matters, they do not leave without his permission. (Muhammad), those who ask your permission believe in God and His Messenger. When they ask your leave to attend to their affairs, you may give permission to anyone of them you choose and ask forgiveness for them from God. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
24|63|Do not address the Messenger as you would call each other. God knows those who secretly walk away from you and hide themselves. Those who oppose the Messengers should beware, lest some trouble or a painful torment should befall them
24|64|The heavens and the earth, certainly, belong to God. He surely knows all about you in this life. On the day when you return to Him, He will tell you all about whatever you have done. God has the knowledge of all things
25|1|Blessed is He who has revealed the criteria (for discerning truth from falsehood) to His servant so that He could warn mankind
25|2|To Him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He has not begotten any sons, nor does He have any partner in His kingdom. He has created all things with precisely accurate planning
25|3|Yet they have chosen for themselves other deities besides Him, who do not create anything but rather are themselves created, who have no power over their own benefits, or trouble, and who have no control over life, death, and resurrection
25|4|The unbelievers say, "This (Quran) is no more than a slanderous statement which he (Muhammad), with the help of some other people, has falsely invented." Certainly, this statement is unjust and sinful
25|5|They have also said, "It, (the Quran), is only ancient legends, which were written down while they were dictated to him in the mornings and the evenings
25|6|(Muhammad), tell them, "The One who knows all the secrets of the heavens and the earth has revealed it; He is All-forgiving and All-merciful
25|7|They say, "Why does this Messenger eat food, and walk in the streets? Why has not an angel been sent to him so that they could preach the message together
25|8|Why has a treasure not been laid out for him or a garden from which he could eat been given to him." The unjust ones say, "You are merely following a bewitched person
25|9|Look at their various views about you! They have gone astray and are not able to find the right path
25|10|Blessed is He who could give you palaces and gardens wherein streams would flow, far better than what they want you to have
25|11|They deny the Hour of Doom so We have prepared for them a burning fire
25|12|Even if they were to see [this fire] from a distant place, they would only listen to its raging and roaring
25|13|When they are thrown, bound, into a narrow place therein, then only will they wish for their death
25|14|They will be told, "Do not pray to die only once but pray to die many times
25|15|(Muhammad), ask them, "Is what you want better or the eternal garden promised to the pious ones as their reward and dwelling
25|16|Therein they will eternally have whatever they want. This is a binding promise from your Lord
25|17|On the day when the unbelievers and whatever they had been worshipping besides God will be resurrected, He will ask the idols, "Did you mislead My servants or did they themselves go astray from the right path
25|18|They will reply, "Lord, You alone deserve all glory! We were not supposed to choose any guardian other than you. Since you have been benevolent to these people and their fathers, they forgot Your guidance and, thus, became subject to perdition
25|19|God will say (to the idolaters), "Your idols have rejected your faith. You cannot avoid their rejection nor can you find any help. Anyone of you who commits injustice will be made to suffer a great torment
25|20|All the Messengerss whom We sent before, certainly, ate food and walked through the streets. We have made some of you (people) a trial for the others. Would you then exercise patience? Your Lord is All-aware
25|21|Those who have no desire to meet Us have said, "Would that the angels had been sent to us or that we could see our Lord." They are really filled with pride and have committed the greatest and worst kind of rebellion and hostility
25|22|On the day when the criminals see the angels, there will, certainly, be no rejoicing for them. Rather, they will plead to the angels, "Please keep away from us (do not drive us into hell)
25|23|We shall call their deeds into Our presence and scatter them into the air as dust (turn them devoid of all virtue)
25|24|The dwellers of Paradise on that day will have the best residence and resting place
25|25|On that day the sky will be crystal blue, clear of clouds. The angels will descend in groups
25|26|and the Absolute kingdom will belong to the Beneficent God
25|27|It will be a hard day for the unbelievers. It will be a day when the unjust will bite their fingers, (regretfully) saying, "Would that we had followed the path of the Messengers
25|28|Woe to us! Would that we had not been friends with so and so
25|29|He led me away from the true guidance after it had come to us. Satan is a traitor to people
25|30|The Messengers will say, "Lord, my people had abandoned this Quran
25|31|Thus, from the sinful people We made enemies for every Prophet. Your Lord is a Sufficient Guide and Helper
25|32|The unbelievers have said, "Why was the whole Quran not revealed to him at once?" We have revealed it to you in gradual steps to strengthen your hearts and give you explanations
25|33|We will support you with the Truth and the best interpretation whenever the infidels argue against you
25|34|Those who will be driven headlong into hell will have a terrible dwelling; they have certainly gone astray
25|35|We gave the Book to Moses and made his brother Aaron his Minister
25|36|We told them, "Both of you go to the people who have rejected Our revelations." We completely destroyed these unbelievers
25|37|We drowned the people of Noah because of their rejection of the Messengers and made them evidence of the Truth for mankind. We have prepared a painful torment for the unjust ones
25|38|To each of the tribes of Ad, Thamud, the settlers around the well and many generations in between
25|39|We gave guidance and drove each to destruction
25|40|Our Messengers came into the town which was struck by a fatal rain. Did they (unbelievers), not see what had happened to this town? In fact, they had no faith in the Resurrection
25|41|(Muhammad), when they see you, they will only mock you and say, "Has God really sent him as a Messengers
25|42|Had we not been steadfast he would almost have led us astray from our gods." On facing torment they will soon know who had really gone astray
25|43|How can you be the guardian of those who have chosen their own desires as their Lord
25|44|Do you think that most of them listen and understand? They are like cattle or even more, straying and confused
25|45|[Have you not seen that your Lord increases the shadow. Had He wanted He would have made it stationary], and has made the sun their guide
25|46|Then He reduces it in gradual steps
25|47|It is He who has made the night as a covering for you, sleep as a rest for you, and the day for you to rise again
25|48|It is He who sends the winds to you with the glad news of His mercy and who sends purifying rain from the sky
25|49|to revive the barren land and provide water for many creatures, cattle, and people
25|50|We send them rain from time to time so that they may take heed. Many people have responded, but ungratefully
25|51|Had We wanted We could have sent a Prophet to every town
25|52|Do not yield to the unbelievers but launch a great campaign against them with the help of the Quran
25|53|It is He who has joined the two seas; one palatable and sweet, the other bitterly salty and has established a barrier between them as a partition
25|54|It is He who has created the human being from water to have relationships of both lineage and wedlock. Your Lord has all power
25|55|They worship besides God things that can neither benefit nor harm them. The unbelievers are defiant against their Lord
25|56|We have sent you for no other reason but to be a bearer of glad news and warning
25|57|Tell them, "I ask no recompense for my preaching to you, except the fact that whoever wants should choose the way of God
25|58|Also trust in the Living One who never dies and glorify Him with His praise. He has sufficient knowledge of the sins of His servants
25|59|It is He who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days and then He established His domination over the Throne. He is the Beneficent God. Refer to Him as the final authority
25|60|When they are told to prostrate themselves before the Beneficent God, they say, "Who is the Beneficent God? Why should we prostrate ourselves before the one whom you have commanded us to?" This only increases their rebelliousness
25|61|Blessed is He who has established constellations in the sky and made therein a lamp and a shining moon
25|62|It is He who has made the night and the day, one proceeding the other, for whoever wants to take heed or give thanks
25|63|(Among) the servants of the Beneficent God are those who walk gently on the earth and when addressed by the ignorant ones, their only response is, "Peace be with you
25|64|They are those who spend the night worshipping their Lord, prostrating, and standing
25|65|who pray, "Lord, protect us from the torment of hell; it is a great loss
25|66|It is a terrible abode and an evil station
25|67|who in their spending are neither extravagant nor stingy but maintain moderation
25|68|who do not worship idols besides God, nor without a just cause murder a soul to whom God has granted amnesty, who do not commit fornication, for those who do so have committed a sin
25|69|and on the Day of Judgment their torment will be double. They will suffer forever in disgrace
25|70|But only those who repent and believe and act righteously will have their sins replaced by virtue; God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
25|71|Those who repent and act righteously have truly returned to God
25|72|those who do not testify falsely and when they come across something impious, pass it by nobly
25|73|who, when reminded of the revelations of their Lord, do not try to ignore them as though deaf and blind. Rather, they try to understand and think about them
25|74|They pray, "Lord, let our spouses and children be the delight of our eyes and ourselves examples for the pious ones
25|75|They will all receive Paradise as their reward for their forbearance and patience, where they will be greeted with, "Peace be with you
25|76|They will live therein forever, the best abode and place of rest
25|77|(Muhammad), say (to the disbeliever) "It does not matter to my Lord whether you worship Him or not. You have rejected His guidance and your punishment is inevitable
26|1|Ta. Sin. Mim
26|2|These are the verses of the illustrious Book
26|3|You will perhaps kill yourself with anguish because they are not accepting the faith
26|4|Had We wanted, We would have sent them a miracle from the sky to make their heads hang down in submission
26|5|Whenever a new message comes to them from the Beneficent God, they turn away from it
26|6|They have called (our revelation) lies. They will soon learn the consequences of what they mocked
26|7|Have they not seen the earth in which We have made gracious plants grow
26|8|In this there is, certainly, evidence (of the Truth). But most of them have no faith
26|9|Your Lord is the Majestic and the All-merciful
26|10|When Your Lord told Moses to go to the unjust people of the Pharaoh
26|11|and ask them, "Why do you not fear God
26|12|He replied, "Lord, I am afraid that they will call me a liar
26|13|I feel nervous and my tongue is not fluent, so send Aaron with me
26|14|They have charged me [with a crime] for which I am afraid they will kill me
26|15|The Lord said, "Have no fear, both of you go with Our miracles. We shall closely listen to you
26|16|They came to the Pharaoh and said, "We are the Messengerss of the Lord of the Universe
26|17|Send the Israelites with us
26|18|The Pharaoh said, "Did we not bring you up in our home as an infant and did you not live with us for many years
26|19|and you did the deed which you did. You are certainly ungrateful
26|20|Moses said, "I did do it and I made a mistake
26|21|Then I ran away from you in fear, but my Lord granted me the law and has appointed me as a Messenger
26|22|And this is the favor with which you oblige me: You have made the Israelites your slaves
26|23|The Pharaoh asked, "Who is the Lord of the Universe
26|24|Moses replied, "The Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, if you want to be certain
26|25|The Pharaoh said to the people around him, "Did you hear that
26|26|Moses continued, "He is the Lord and the Lord of your forefathers
26|27|The Pharaoh said, "The Messengers who has been sent to you is certainly insane
26|28|Moses continued, "He is the Lord of the East and West and all that is between them, if only you would think
26|29|Pharaoh said, "If you put forward any god other than me, I will surely put you in prison
26|30|Moses asked, "What if I were to bring you clear proof (of the existence of God)
26|31|The Pharaoh replied, "Bring it, if you are telling the truth
26|32|Moses threw his staff and suddenly it became a serpent
26|33|Then he uncovered his hand and it was sheer white to the onlookers
26|34|The Pharaoh said to the people around him, "He is certainly a skillful magician
26|35|He wants to expel you from your land through his magic. What is your opinion
26|36|They said, "Hold him and his brother off for a while
26|37|and summon every skillful magician from all the cities
26|38|So all the magicians gathered together
26|39|at the appointed time
26|40|and the people were asked, "Will you all be there so that we may follow the magicians if they become victorious
26|41|When the magicians came, they asked the Pharaoh, "Will there be any reward for us if we win
26|42|He replied, "You will then be my closest associates
26|43|(Moses) asked the magicians, "Cast down what you want to
26|44|So they cast down their ropes and staffs saying, "By the honor of the Pharaoh we shall certainly become the winners
26|45|Then Moses cast down his staff and suddenly it swallowed up what they had falsely invented
26|46|The magicians fell down in adoration
26|47|saying, "We believe in the Lord of the Universe
26|48|and the Lord of Moses and Aaron
26|49|The Pharaoh said, "You believed without my permission? He seems to be your chief who has taught you magic. But you will soon know (the result of what you have done)
26|50|I shall certainly cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides and crucify you all together
26|51|They said, "It does not matter. We shall be returning to our Lord
26|52|We hope that our Lord will forgive us for our sins; we were not believers at first
26|53|We sent a revelation to Moses telling him to leave with our servants during the night; they would be pursued (by the Pharaoh)
26|54|The Pharaoh sent word to all the cities saying
26|55|There is a small group of people
26|56|who have enraged us greatly
26|57|We are warning all of you about them
26|58|We deprived them (the unbelievers) of gardens, springs
26|59|treasures, and graceful dwellings
26|60|Thus we let the Israelites inherit them all
26|61|The people of the Pharaoh pursued them at sunrise
26|62|When the two groups came close to each other, the companions of Moses said, "We will be caught
26|63|Moses said, "Certainly not. My Lord is with me and He will certainly guide me
26|64|We sent a revelation to Moses saying, "Strike the sea with your staff." The sea was rent asunder and each side stood high up like a huge mountain
26|65|Then We brought the two parties closer
26|66|We saved Moses and all the people with him
26|67|and drowned the other party
26|68|In this there was certainly evidence (of the Truth), but most of them did not have any faith
26|69|Your Lord is certainly Majestic and All-merciful
26|70|Tell them the story of Abraham
26|71|when he asked his father and others, "What do you worship
26|72|They replied, "We worship idols and shall continue to worship them
26|73|He asked them, "Can the idols hear you when you pray to them
26|74|or can they benefit or harm you
26|75|They said, "No, but our fathers worshipped them
26|76|(Abraham) said, "Do you know that what you worship and what your grandfathers worshipped
26|77|are my enemies? Not so the Lord of the Universe
26|78|He created me and He will guide me
26|79|It is He who gives me food and drink
26|80|and heals me when I am sick
26|81|He will cause me to die and will bring me back to life
26|82|It is He whom I expect to forgive my sins on the Day of Judgment
26|83|Lord, grant me authority. Join me to the righteous ones
26|84|Make my words come true in the future
26|85|Make me inherit the bountiful Paradise
26|86|Forgive my father. He has gone astray
26|87|Do not betray me
26|88|on the Day of Judgment when neither wealth nor children will be of any benefit
26|89|except what is done in obedience to God with a submissive heart
26|90|On the Day of Judgment Paradise will be brought near
26|91|the pious and hell will be left open for the rebellious ones
26|92|who will be asked, "What did you worship
26|93|besides God? Will the idols help you? Can they help themselves
26|94|The idol worshippers, the idols, the rebellious ones
26|95|and the army of satan will all be thrown headlong into hell
26|96|Quarrelling therein with each other
26|97|they will say, "By God, we were in clear error
26|98|when we considered you equal to the Lord of the Universe
26|99|Only the sinful ones made us go astray
26|100|We have no one to intercede for us before God
26|101|nor a loving friend
26|102|Would that we could have a chance to live again so that we might become believers
26|103|In this there is evidence (of the truth), but many of them do not have any faith
26|104|Your Lord is certainly Majestic and All-merciful
26|105|The people of Noah rejected the Messengerss
26|106|<span class="col">Their brother Noah asked them, "Why do you not fear God
26|107|I am a trustworthy Messengers sent to you
26|108|Have fear of God and obey me
26|109|I ask no payment from you for my preaching. The Lord of the Universe will give me my reward
26|110|Have fear of God and obey me
26|111|They said, "Should we believe in you when no one has followed you except the lowest ones
26|112|(Noah) said, "I have no knowledge of their deeds
26|113|If only you would realize, their account is with my Lord
26|114|I do not drive away the believers
26|115|I am only a Prophet
26|116|They said, "Noah, if you do not desist, you will, certainly, be stoned to death
26|117|Then Noah said, "Lord, my people have rejected me
26|118|Judge among us and save me and the believers with me
26|119|We saved him and those who were with him in a fully laden Ark
26|120|and drowned the others
26|121|In this there is evidence (of the truth) but most of them do not have any faith
26|122|Your Lord is Majestic and All-merciful
26|123|The tribe of Ad rejected the Messengers
26|124|Their brother Hud asked them, "Why do you not have fear of God
26|125|I am a trustworthy Messengers sent to you
26|126|Have fear of God and obey me
26|127|I do not ask for any payment for my preaching. I shall receive my reward from the Lord of the Universe
26|128|Do you build useless monuments on every mountain
26|129|and raise strong mansions as if you were to live forever
26|130|When you attack, you attack as tyrants do
26|131|Have fear of God and obey me
26|132|Have fear of the One who has bestowed upon you all that you know
26|133|He has given you cattle, children
26|134|gardens, and springs
26|135|I am afraid that you will suffer the torment of the Day of Judgment
26|136|They said, "Whether you preach to us or not
26|137|your preaching is nothing but ancient legends and we shall not face any torment
26|138|They rejected him and We destroyed them
26|139|In this there is evidence (of the Truth), yet most of them do not have any faith
26|140|Your Lord is Majestic and All-merciful
26|141|The tribe of Thamud rejected the Messengers
26|142|Their brother Salih asked them, "Why do you not fear God
26|143|I am a trustworthy Messengers sent to you
26|144|Have fear of God and obey me
26|145|I do not ask for any payment for my preaching. I shall receive my reward from the Lord of the Universe
26|146|Do you think that you will remain here peacefully forever
26|147|amidst the gardens, springs
26|148|farms, and palm-trees in thick groves
26|149|carving comfortable houses out of the mountains
26|150|Have fear of God and obey me
26|151|Do not obey the orders of the transgressors
26|152|who spread evil in the land with no reform
26|153|They said, "You are only bewitched and insane
26|154|You are a mere mortal like us. Show us a miracle if you are telling the Truth
26|155|He said, "This is a she-camel. She will have her share of water as you have your share, each on a certain day
26|156|Do not cause her to suffer lest you become subject to the torment of the great day (of Judgment)
26|157|They slew the she-camel, but later became regretful
26|158|and torment struck them. In this there is evidence of the Truth, yet many people do not have any faith
26|159|Your Lord is Majestic and All-merciful
26|160|The people of Lot rejected the Messengers
26|161|Their brother Lot asked them, "Why do you not have fear of God
26|162|I am a trustworthy Messengers
26|163|Have fear of God and obey me
26|164|I do not ask any payment for my preaching. I shall receive my reward from the Lord of the Universe
26|165|Do you, in the world, want to have carnal relations with males
26|166|instead of your wives, whom your Lord has created specially for you? You are a transgressing people
26|167|They said, "Lot, if you do not give up preaching, you will certainly be expelled (from this town)
26|168|He said, "I certainly hate what you practice
26|169|Lord, save me and my family from their deeds
26|170|We saved him and all of his family
26|171|except an old woman who remained behind
26|172|We destroyed the others
26|173|by pouring upon them a terrible shower of rain. How evil was the rain for those who had been warned
26|174|In this there is an evidence of the Truth, but many of them did not have any faith
26|175|Your Lord is Majestic and All-merciful
26|176|The dwellers of the forest also rejected the Messengers
26|177|Shu'ayb asked them, "Why do you not have fear of God
26|178|I am a trustworthy Messengers
26|179|Have fear of God and obey me
26|180|I do not ask any payment for my preaching. I shall receive my reward from the Lord of the Universe
26|181|Maintain just measure in your business and do not cause loss to others
26|182|Weigh your goods with proper balance
26|183|and do not defraud people in their property or spread evil in the land
26|184|Have fear of the One who has created you and the generations that lived before you
26|185|They said, "You are no more than a bewitched and insane man
26|186|and a mere mortal like us. We think you are a liar
26|187|Let a part of the sky fall on us if what you say is true
26|188|He said, "My Lord knows all that you do
26|189|They rejected him and then the torment of the gloomy day struck them. It was certainly a great torment
26|190|In this there is an evidence of the Truth, but many of them did not have any faith
26|191|Your Lord is Majestic and All-merciful
26|192|This, (Quran), is certainly the revelation from the Lord of the Universe
26|193|It has been revealed through the trustworthy Spirit
26|194|to your heart, so that you will warn (the people of the dangers of disobeying God)
26|195|It has been revealed in plain Arabic
26|196|Its news was also mentioned in the ancient Books
26|197|Is not the fact (that the Israelite scholars already knew about the Quran through their Book) sufficient evidence for the pagans of the truthfulness (of the Quran)
26|198|Had We revealed it to a non-Arab
26|199|who would have read it to them, they (pagans) would not have believed in it
26|200|Thus it passes through the hearts of the criminals
26|201|They will not believe in it until they suffer the painful torment
26|202|The torment will strike them suddenly without their knowledge
26|203|They will say, "Can we be granted any respite
26|204|Do they want to hasten Our torment
26|205|Do you not see that even if We give them respite for years
26|206|and then Our torment will strike them
26|207|none of their luxuries will be able to save them from the torment
26|208|We never destroyed any town without first sending to them warning and guidance
26|209|We have never been unjust to anyone
26|210|The satans have not revealed the Quran
26|211|they are not supposed to do so. Nor do have they the ability for such a task
26|212|The satans are barred from listening to anything from the heavens
26|213|(Muhammad), do not worship anything besides God lest you suffer the punishment
26|214|Warn your close relatives
26|215|and be kind to your believing followers
26|216|If they disobey you, tell them, "I condemn your disobedient deeds
26|217|Have trust in the Majestic and All-merciful God
26|218|who can see whether you stand up
26|219|or move during your prostration with the worshippers
26|220|He is All-hearing and All-knowing
26|221|Should I tell you to whom the satans come
26|222|They come to every sinful liar
26|223|The satans try to listen to the heavens but many of them are liars
26|224|Only the erring people follow the poets
26|225|Have you not seen them wandering and bewildered in every valley
26|226|and preaching what they themselves never practice
26|227|The righteously striving believers among them who remember God very often and use their talent to seek help after they have been wronged are the exceptional. The unjust will soon know how terrible their end will be
27|1|Ta. Sin. These are the verses of the Quran and of the illustrious Book
27|2|They are glad news and guidance for the believers
27|3|who are steadfast in prayer, who pay the religious tax, and who have strong faith in the life hereafter
27|4|We have made the deeds of those who do not believe in the life to come, attractive to them and they wander about blindly
27|5|They will suffer the worst kind of torment and will be lost in the life to come
27|6|(Muhammad), you have certainly received the Quran from the All-wise and All-knowing One
27|7|Moses said to his family, "I have seen some fire. I shall bring you some news about it or some fire so that you can warmyourselves
27|8|When he approached the fire, he was told, "Blessed is the one in the fire and those around it. All glory belongs to God, the Lord of the Universe
27|9|Moses, I am God, the Majestic and All-wise
27|10|Throw down your staff." When Moses saw his staff on the ground moving like a living creature, he stepped back and did not come forward again. The Lord said,"Moses, do not be afraid. Messengers do not become afraid in My presence
27|11|Only the unjust become afraid in My presence. Even to these people who replace their bad deeds by good ones, I am All-forgiving and All-merciful
27|12|Put your hand into your pocket. It will come out sheer white but unharmed. This is one of the nine miracles which shall be showing to the Pharaoh and his people; they are truly wicked men
27|13|When Our miracles were visibly shown to them, they said, "It is plain magic
27|14|They rejected the evidence because of their arrogance and injustice, although their souls knew it to be true. Think how terrible the end of the sinful ones was
27|15|We gave knowledge to David and Soloman. They said, "It is only God who deserves all praise. He has exalted us above many of His believing servants
27|16|Solomon became the heir to David. He said, "People, we have been taught the language of the birds and have been granted a share of everything. This indeed is a manifest favor (from God)
27|17|Soloman's army, consisting of human beings, jinn, and birds were gathered together in his presence in ranks
27|18|When they arrived in the valley of the ants, one ant said to the others, "Enter your dwellings lest you be carelessly crushed by Soloman and his army
27|19|(Solomon) smiled at the ant's remarks and said, "Lord, inspire me to thank you for Your favors to me and my parents and to act righteously so as to please you. Admit me, by your mercy into the company of Your righteous servants
27|20|(Solomon) inspected the birds and said, "How is it that I cannot see the hoopoe. Is he absent
27|21|I shall certainly punish him severely or slaughter him unless he has a good reason for his absence
27|22|Not long after the hoopoe came forward and said, "I have information which you do not have. I have come from the land of Sheba with a true report
27|23|I found a woman ruling the people there and she possessed something of (almost) everything and a great throne
27|24|I found her and her people prostrating before the sun instead of God. Satan has made their deeds attractive to them. He has kept them away from the right path and they have no guidance
27|25|(Satan has done this) so that they will not worship God who brings forth whatever is hidden in the heavens and the earth and knows whatever you conceal or reveal
27|26|God is the only Lord and master of the Great Throne
27|27|Solomon said, "We shall see whether you are truthful or a liar
27|28|Take this letter of mine and deliver it to them, then return and see what their reply will be
27|29|(The Queen of Sheba) said to her officials, "A gracious letter has been dropped before me
27|30|It reads, 'From Soloman. In the Name of God, the Beneficent and the Merciful
27|31|Do not consider yourselves superior to me but come to me as Muslims (in submission)
27|32|She said, "My officials, what are your views on this matter? I will not decide until I have your views
27|33|They replied, "We have great power and valor. You are the commander, so decide as you like
27|34|She said, "When Kings enter a town they destroy it and disrespect its honorable people. That is what they will do, too
27|35|I will send a gift and we shall see what response the Messengers will bring
27|36|When her Messengers came to Soloman, he said, "Have you brought me wealth? What God has given to me is far better than what He has given to you, but you are happy with your gifts
27|37|Go back to your people and we shall soon come there with an army which they will not be able to face. We shall drive them from their town, humble, and disgraced
27|38|Solomon asked his people, "Who among you can bring her throne before (she, the queen of Sheba) comes to me submissively
27|39|A monstrous jinn said, "I can bring it before you even stand up. I am powerful and trustworthy
27|40|The one who had knowledge from the Book said, "I can bring it to you before you even blink your eye." When Solomon saw the throne placed before him, he said, "This is a favor from my Lord by which He wants to test whether I am grateful or ungrateful. Whoever thanks God does so for his own good. Whoever is ungrateful to God should know that my Lord is Self-Sufficient and Benevolent
27|41|Then he said, "Make a few changes to her throne and let us see whether she will recognize it or not
27|42|When she came she was asked, "Is your throne like this?" She replied, "It seems that this is it. We had received the knowledge before this and were submissive (to Solomon's power)
27|43|Her idols prevented her from believing in God and she was an infidel
27|44|She was told to enter the palace. When she saw it, she thought that it was a pool and raised her clothe up to her legs. Solomon said, "This is a palace constructed with glass." She said, "My Lord, indeed I have wronged myself and I submit myself with Solomon to the will of God, the Lord of the Universe
27|45|We sent to the tribe of Thamud their brother Salih so that they would worship God, but they became two quarrelling groups
27|46|Salih said, "My people, why do you commit sins so quickly before doing good? Would that you ask forgiveness from God so that perhaps He will have mercy upon you
27|47|They said, "We have an ill omen about you and your followers." Salih replied, God has made your ill fortune await you. You are a people on trial
27|48|There were nine tribes in the city spreading evil without any reform in the land
27|49|They said, "Let us swear by God to do away with him and his family during the night then tell his guardian that we did not see how he and his family had been destroyed, and we shall be telling the truth
27|50|They plotted and We planned without their knowledge. Consider the result of their plot
27|51|We destroyed them and their people altogether
27|52|Those are their empty houses which We ruined because of their injustice. In this there is evidence (of the truth) for the people of knowledge
27|53|We saved the faithful God-fearing believers
27|54|Lot asked his people, "Do you understandably commit indecency
27|55|Do you have carnal relations with men rather than women? You are ignorant people
27|56|His people had no answer but to say, "Expel Lot and his family from the town for they want to be pure
27|57|We saved (Lot) and his family except his wife who was destined to remain behind
27|58|We sent to them a terrible rainstorm. How horrible was the rain for the people who had already received warning
27|59|(Muhammad), say, "It is only God who deserves all praise. Peace be upon His chosen servants. Which is better God or the idols
27|60|(Are the idols worthier or) the One who has created the heavens and the earth, who has sent water from the sky for you, who has established delightful gardens and you could not even plant one tree? Is there any Lord besides God? In fact, the unbelievers are the ones who deviate from the right path
27|61|(Are the idols worthier or) the One who has made the earth a resting place, the rivers flow from its valleys, the mountains as anchors and a barrier between the two seas? Is there any lord besides God? In fact, most people do not know
27|62|(Are the idols worthier or) the One who answers the prayers of the distressed ones, removes their hardship, and makes you the successors in the land? Is there any lord besides God? In fact, you take very little heed
27|63|(Are the idols worthier or) the One who guides you in the darkness of the land and sea and sends the winds bearing the glad news of His mercy? Is there any lord besides God? God is too exalted to be considered equal to anything else
27|64|(Are the idols worthier or) the One who began the creation and who will turn it back, who gives you sustenance from the heavens and the earth? Is there any lord besides God? Say, "Bring your proof if what you say is true
27|65|(Muhammad) say, "No one in the heavens or the earth knows the unseen except God, and no one knows when they will be resurrected
27|66|Their knowledge of the next life is no more than doubts. In fact, they are blind about it
27|67|The unbelievers have said, "Shall we and our fathers be brought out of the graves after we become dust
27|68|It was promised to us and to our fathers before us. It is only ancient legends
27|69|Say, "Travel through the land and see how terrible was the end of the criminal ones
27|70|(Muhammad), do not be grieved (about their disbelief) nor distressed about their evil plans against you
27|71|They ask, "When the Day of Judgment will come, if it is true at all
27|72|Say, "Perhaps some of the things which you wish to experience immediately are very close to you
27|73|Your Lord has many favors for mankind but most of them are ungrateful
27|74|Your Lord certainly knows whatever their hearts conceal or reveal
27|75|All the secrets in heavens and earth are recorded in the illustrious Book
27|76|This Quran tells the Israelites most of the matters about which they had disputes among themselves
27|77|It is a guide and mercy for the believers
27|78|Your Lord will judge among them according to His own decree. He is Majestic and All-Knowing
27|79|Trust in God for you follow the manifest truth
27|80|You cannot make the dead listen and the deaf are unable to hear calls. Thus, they turn back on their heels
27|81|You cannot guide the straying blind ones. You can only make hear those who believe in Our revelations submissively
27|82|When the word about them comes true We shall make a creature appear to them on earth who will tell them that people had no faith in Our revelations
27|83|On the day when We resurrect from every nation a group from among those who had rejected Our revelations, they will be kept confined in ranks
27|84|When they will be brought into the presence of God, He will ask them, "Did you reject My revelations without fully understanding them. What did you know about them if you had any knowledge at all
27|85|They will become subject to punishment because of their injustice. Thus, they will not speak
27|86|Have they not seen that We have created the night for them to rest and the day for them to see. In this there is evidence for the believing people
27|87|Everyone in the heavens and earth will be terrified on the day when the trumpet will be sounded except those whom God will save. Everyone will humbly come into the presence of God
27|88|You think the mountains are solid. In fact, they move like clouds. It is God's technique which has established everything perfectly. He is well Aware of what you do
27|89|Whoever does a good deed will receive a better reward than what he has done. He will be secure from the terror of the Day of Judgment
27|90|Those who commit evil will be thrown headlong into hell fire. (It will be said to them) can you expect any recompense other than what you deserve for your deeds
27|91|I am commanded to worship the Lord of this town which He has made sacred. To Him belong all things. I am commanded to be a Muslim
27|92|and recite the Quran. Whoever seeks guidance will find it for his own soul. Say to whoever goes astray, "I am only a warner
27|93|Say, "It is only He who deserves all praise. He will soon show you His signs and you will recognize them. Your Lord is not unaware of what you do
28|1|Ta. Sin. Mim
28|2|These are the verses of the illustrious Book
28|3|We recite to you some of the story of Moses and the Pharaoh for a genuine purpose, and for the benefit of the believing people
28|4|The Pharaoh dominated the land and divided its inhabitants into different groups, suppressing one group by killing their sons and keeping their women alive. He was certainly an evil-doer
28|5|But We have decided to grant a favor to the suppressed ones by appointing them leaders and heirs of the land
28|6|give them power in the land and make the Pharaoh, Haman (his Minister), and their armies to experience from their victims what they feared most
28|7|We inspired Moses' mother saying, "Breast-feed your son. When you become afraid for his life, throw him into the sea. Do not be afraid or grieved for We shall return him to you and make him a Messenger
28|8|The people of the Pharaoh picked him up (without realizing) that he would become their enemy and a source of their sorrow. The Pharaoh, Haman, and their army were sinful people
28|9|The Pharaoh's wife said, "He, (Moses), is the delight of our eyes. Do not kill him. Perhaps he will benefit us or we may adopt him." They were unaware of the future
28|10|The heart of Moses' mother was relieved and confident. But she would almost have made the whole matter public had We not strengthened her heart with faith
28|11|She told Moses' sister to follow her brother. His sister watched him from one side and the people of the Pharaoh did not notice her presence
28|12|We had decreed that the infant must not be breast-fed by any nurse besides his mother. His sister said to the people of the Pharaoh, "May I show you a family who can nurse him for you with kindness
28|13|Thus did We return Moses to his mother that We would delight her eyes, relieve her sorrows, and let her know that the promise of God was true, but many people do not know
28|14|When he become matured and grow to manhood, We granted him wisdom and knowledge. Thus do We reward the righteous ones
28|15|He entered the city without the knowledge of its inhabitants and found two men fighting each other. One was his follower and the other his enemy. His follower asked him for help. Moses struck his enemy to death, but later said, "It was the work of satan; he is the sworn enemy of the human being and wants to mislead him
28|16|(Moses) said, "Lord, I have wronged myself. Forgive me!" The Lord forgave him; He is All-forgiving and All-merciful
28|17|He said, "Lord, in appreciation for Your favor to me I shall never support the criminals
28|18|He remained in the city but very afraid and cautious. Suddenly the person who asked him for help the previous day asked him for help again. Moses said, "You are certainly a mischievous person
28|19|When Moses was about to attack their enemy, he said, "Moses, do you want to kill me as you slew a soul the other day? Do you want to become a tyrant in the land, not a reformer
28|20|A man came running from the farthest part of the city saying, "Moses, people are planning to kill you. I sincerely advise you to leave the city
28|21|So he left the city afraid and cautious, saying, "Lord, protect me against the unjust people
28|22|When he started his journey to Midian he said, "Perhaps my Lord will show me the right path
28|23|When he arrived at the well of Midian, he found some people watering (their sheep) and two women keeping the sheep away from the others. He asked the two women, "What is the matter with you?" They replied, "We cannot water our sheep until all the shepherds have driven away their flocks. Our father is an old man
28|24|Moses watered their flocks and then sought shelter under a shadow praying, "Lord, I need the means to preserve (the power) that You have granted me
28|25|One of the women, walking bashfully, came to Moses and said, "My father calls you and wants to pay you for your watering our flocks." When Moses came to the woman's father and told him his whole story, he said, "Do not be afraid. Now you are secure from the unjust people
28|26|One of the women said to her father, "Father, hire him; the best whom you may hire is a strong and trustworthy one
28|27|He (Shu'ayb) said to (Moses), "I want to give one of my daughters to you in marriage on the condition that you will work for me for eight years, but you may continue for two more years only out of your own accord. I do not want it to become a burden for you. God willing, you will find me a righteous person
28|28|(Moses) said, "Let it be a binding contract between us and I shall be free to serve for any of the said terms. God will bear witness to our agreement
28|29|When Moses completed the term of the contract and departed from his employer with his family, he saw a fire (on his way) on one side of the Mount (Sinai). He asked his wife, "Stay here. I can see some fire. Perhaps I will be able to bring some news of it or some fire for you to warm-up yourselves
28|30|He was called from a tree of the blessed spot of the bank of the right side of the valley when he appraoched it, "Moses, I am God, the Lord of the Universe
28|31|Throw down your staff." When Moses saw his staff moving on the ground like a living being he fled with no desire to step forward. He was told, "Moses, step forward. Do not be afraid; you will be safe and secure
28|32|Place your hand in your pocket; it will come out sheer white but not sick. Be humble for fear of God and show these two miracles of your Lord to the Pharaoh and his officials; they are an evil-doing people
28|33|(Moses) said, "Lord, I have killed a man from their people and I am afraid that they will kill me
28|34|My brother Aaron is more fluent then I am. Send him with me to assist me and express my truthfulness; I am afraid they will reject me
28|35|The Lord said, "We will support you by your brother and will grant you such prestige that no one will dare to approach anyone of you. By the help of Our miracles both you and your follower will certainly triumph
28|36|When Moses came to them with Our miracles, they said, "These are only invented magic. We have never heard of such things from our fathers
28|37|Moses said, "My Lord knows best who has received guidance from Him and who will achieve a happy end. The unjust ones certainly will have no happiness
28|38|The Pharaoh said, "My people, I know no one who could be your lord besides myself. Haman, construct for me a tower of baked bricks so that I may climb on it and see the God of Moses; I think he is a liar
28|39|The Pharaoh and his army were puffed-up with pride in the land for no true cause. They thought that they would never return to Us
28|40|We sized him and his army and threw them into the sea. See how terrible was the end of the unjust people
28|41|We made them the kinds of leaders who would invite people to the fire and who would receive no help on the Day of Judgment
28|42|We made them to be mentioned with condemnation in this life and they will be disgraced on the Day of Judgment
28|43|After destroying the people of the ancient towns We gave the Book to Moses to be a source of knowledge, a guidance, and mercy for mankind so that perhaps they would take heed
28|44|(Muhammad), you were not present at the west bank to witness when We gave the commandments to Moses
28|45|But We raised many generations after Moses and they lived for many years. You did not dwell with the people of Midian reciting Our revelations to them, but We had certainly sent Messengers to them
28|46|You had not been present at the side of the Mount (Sinai) when We called Moses (from the tree), but through Our mercy we told you his story so that you might warn the people
28|47|to whom no warner had been sent that perhaps they might take heed, and that, on experiencing afflictions because of their own deeds, they may not say, "Lord, would that You had sent to us a Messenger so that we could follow Your revelations and become believers
28|48|When the Truth from Us came to them they said, "Would that he, (Muhammad), had received what was given to Moses (by his Lord)." Did not they reject what Moses had brought to them saying, "These two, Moses and Aaron, are two magicians who support each other. We do not have any faith in them
28|49|(Muhammad), tell them, "Bring a Book if you are able to, from God better in its guidance than the Torah and the Quran; I shall follow it
28|50|If they cannot meet such a challenge, know that they are only following their (evil) desires. Who strays more than one who follows his desires without guidance from God? God does not guide the unjust people
28|51|We sent Our guidance to them so that perhaps they might take heed
28|52|(Some of) the followers of the Bible believe in the Quran
28|53|When it is recited to them, they say, "We believe in it. It is the Truth from our Lord. We were Muslims before it was revealed
28|54|These will receive double reward for their forbearance, replacing evil by virtue, and for their spending for the cause of God
28|55|When they hear impious words, they ignore them, saying, "We shall be responsible for our deeds and you will be responsible for yours. Peace be with you. We do not want to become ignorant
28|56|(Muhammad), you cannot guide whomever you love, but God guides whomever He wants and knows best those who seek guidance
28|57|They, (the pagans), say, "If we were to follow your guidance we would be snatched away from our land. Have We not given them the secure, holy precinct wherein all types of fruits are brought to them as a sustenance from Us? However, many of them do not know it
28|58|How many nations, who had enjoyed great prosperity, had We destroyed? Those are their homes which were not inhabited thereafter except for a short time. Only We were their heirs
28|59|Your Lord did not destroy the people of the towns without first sending a Messenger to the mother town who would recite His revelations to them. We did not want to destroy the towns if the people therein were not unjust
28|60|Whatever you (people) have been given are only the means for enjoyment and beauty of the worldly life, but the means of enjoyment (which you will receive from God) in the life to come will be better and everlasting. Will you then not take heed
28|61|Is the case of those to whom We have promised good things - which they will certainly receive in the life to come - equal to the case of those to whom We have granted the means of enjoyment in the worldly life and who will certainly be questioned about them in the life to come
28|62|On the day when He will ask (the latter group), "Where are those whom you had considered equal to Me
28|63|Those who have become subject to punishment will say, "Lord, they seduced us." Their idols will say, "We seduced them but we renounce their worshipping us for it was not us whom they worshipped
28|64|They will be told to call their idols. They will call them but will receive no answer. They will see the torment approaching and wish that they had sought guidance
28|65|On the day when God will call them and ask them, "What answer did you give to (Our) messengers
28|66|The door to all answers will be closed to them and they will not even be able to ask one another
28|67|However, those who have repented and have become righteously striving believers will perhaps have everlasting happiness
28|68|Your Lord creates and chooses (to grant mercy) to whomever He wants. (In matters of guidance) they (unbelievers) do not have the choice to choose whatever they want. God is too exalted to be considered equal to anything else
28|69|Your Lord knows all that their hearts hide or reveal
28|70|He is the only God and it is only He who deserves to be given thanks in this world and in the life to come. Judgment is in His hands and to Him you will all return
28|71|(Muhammad), ask them, "Think, if God were to cause the night to continue until the Day of Judgment which Lord besides Him could bring you light? Will you then not listen to (His revelations)
28|72|Say, "Do you not think that if God were to cause the day to continue until the Day of Judgment, which Lord besides Him could bring you the night to rest. Do you not see (His signs)
28|73|He has made the night and day for you to rest as a mercy to you and seek His favor and that perhaps you will give Him thanks
28|74|God will call the unbelievers on the Day of Judgment and ask them, "Where are your idols in which you had faith
28|75|We shall call from every nation a witness and shall ask them to bring proof (in support of their belief). They will know that truth belongs to God and that whatever they had falsely invented has abandoned them
28|76|Korah was a man from the people of Moses. This man rebelled against them. We had given him so much treasure that the keys of the stores of his treasures could hardly even be carried by a group of strong people. His people told him, "Do not be proud of your wealth; God does not love those who are proudly happy of their wealth
28|77|Seek the gains of the life to come through your wealth without ignoring your share of this life. Do favors to others just as God has done favors to you. Do not commit evil in the land for God does not love the evil-doers
28|78|He said, "I have received this wealth because of my knowledge." Did he not know that God had destroyed many generations that lived before him who were stronger than him in power and people? (There will be no need) to ask the criminals what sins they have committed, (for the angels already know them)
28|79|Korah would bedeck himself to show off his wealth. Those who wanted worldly gains would say, "Would that we were given that which Korah has received. He has certainly received a great share
28|80|The people who had received knowledge would tell them, "Woe to you! The reward of God is far better for the righteously striving believers. No one can receive such reward except those who exercise patience
28|81|We caused the earth to swallow up him and his home. No one besides God could help him nor could he himself achieve victory
28|82|The people who the other day had wished to be like him, began saying, "Woe to us! God gives abundant wealth only to those of His servants whom He wants and He determines everyone's share. Had it not been for God's favor to us, He would have caused the earth to swallow us up. Woe to the unbelievers who will have no happiness
28|83|There is the life hereafter which We have prepared for those who do not want to impose their superiority over the others in the land nor commit evil therein. The happy end certainly belongs to the pious ones
28|84|The reward for a good deed will be greater than the deed itself and the recompense for an evil deed will be equivalent to the deed
28|85|(Muhammad), God, Who has commanded you to follow the guidance of the Quran, will certainly return you victoriously to your place of birth. Say, "My Lord knows best who has brought guidance and who is in plain error
28|86|You had no hope of receiving the Book except by the mercy of your Lord. Do not be a supporter of the unbelievers
28|87|Let them not prevent you from following the revelations of God after they are revealed to you. Call (mankind) to your Lord and do not be a pagan
28|88|Do not worship anything besides God. He is the only God. Everything will be destroyed except God. To Him belongs Judgment and to Him you will all return
29|1|Alif. Lam. Mim
29|2|Do people think they will not be tested because they say, "We have faith
29|3|We had certainly tried those who lived before them to make sure who were truthful in their faith and who were liars
29|4|Do the evil-doers think they can escape Us? How terrible is their judgment
29|5|Let those who have the desire to be in the presence of God on the Day of Judgment know that their day will certainly be coming. God is All-Hearing and All-Knowing
29|6|Whoever strives hard should know that it is for his own good. God is independent of the whole world
29|7|We shall expiate the sins of the righteously striving believers and shall reward them better than their deeds
29|8|We have advised the human being, "Be kind to your parents. Do not obey them if they force you to consider equal to Me things which you do not know are such." You will all return (to Me) and I shall show all that you have done
29|9|We shall admit the righteously striving believers into the company of the pious ones
29|10|Some people say, "We have faith in God." But when they face some hardship for His cause, they begin to consider the persecution that they have experienced from people as a torment from God. When your Lord grants you a victory, they say, "We were with you." Does God not know best what is in the hearts of every creature
29|11|God certainly knows all about the believers and the hypocrites
29|12|The unbelievers say to the believers. "Follow our way. We shall take the responsibility for your sins." They cannot take responsibility for any of the sins. They are only liars
29|13|Besides the other burdens that they will have to carry, they will certainly be loaded with the burden of their own sins. They will be questioned on the Day of Judgment about what they had falsely invented
29|14|We sent Noah to his people and he lived with them for nine hundred and fifty years, then the flood engulfed them for their injustice
29|15|We saved Noah and the people in the Ark and made (their case) a miracle for the world
29|16|Abraham told his people, "Worship God and have fear of Him. It is better for you if only you knew it
29|17|You worship idols besides God and you create falsehood. Whatever you worship besides Him cannot provide you with anything for your sustenance. Seek your sustenance from the bounties of God. Worship Him. Give Him thanks. To Him you will all return
29|18|If you, (pagans), call our (revelations) lies, certainly many generations living before you have also done the same thing. The duty of a Messenger is only to preach clearly
29|19|Have they not seen how God begins the creation and then turns it back? This is not difficult at all for God
29|20|(Muhammad), say to them, "Travel through the land and see how He has begun the creation and how He will invent the next life. God has power over all things
29|21|He punishes or grants mercy to whomever He wants and to Him you will all return
29|22|You cannot challenge God in the heavens or in the earth. No one besides God is your guardian or helper
29|23|Those who have rejected God's revelations have no hope in receiving His mercy. They will face a painful torment
29|24|(Abraham's) people had no answer except suggesting, "Kill him or burn him." But God saved him from the fire. In this there is evidence (of truth) for the believing people
29|25|Abraham said, "You believe in idols besides God only out of worldly love, but on the Day of Judgment you will reject and condemn each other. Your dwelling will be fire and no one will help you
29|26|Only Lot believed in (Abraham) and said, "I seek refuge in my Lord, for He is Majestic and All-wise
29|27|We granted Isaac and Jacob to Abraham and We bestowed upon his offspring, prophethood and the Book. We gave him his reward in this world and in the next life, he will be among the pious ones
29|28|Lot told his people, "You are certainly committing the kind of indecency which no one in the world has committed before
29|29|Do you engage in carnal relations with men, rob the travellers, and commit evil in your gatherings? His people had no answer but to say, "Bring upon us the torment of God if you are truthful
29|30|He prayed, "Lord help me against the evil-doing people
29|31|When Our angelic Messengers brought glad news to Abraham, they told him, "We are about to destroy the people of this town for their injustice
29|32|Abraham said, "Lot is there in that town!" They said, "We know everyone there. We shall certainly save him and his family except his wife who will remain behind
29|33|When Our angelic Messengers came to Lot, he was grieved and depressed to see them. They told him, "Do not be afraid or grieved. We will rescue you and your family except your wife who will remain behind
29|34|We will bring torment from the sky on this town because of the evil-deeds of its inhabitants
29|35|We left manifest evidence (of the truth) there for the people of understanding
29|36|We sent to the people of Midian their brother Shu`ayb. He told them, "Worship God. Have hope in the life to come. Do not spread evil in the land
29|37|They rejected him so We jolted them with a violent earthquake and they were left motionless in their houses
29|38|How the people of Ad and Thamud were destroyed is evident to you from their homes. Satan made their deeds seem attractive to them and prevented them from the right path, even though they had visions
29|39|Korah, the Pharaoh, and Haman were also destroyed. Moses had brought them illustrious miracles, but they were puffed-up with pride in the land and they could not defeat Us
29|40|We punished all of these people because of their sin. Some of them were struck by a violent sand-storm, some by a blast of sound, others were swallowed up by the earth, and some were drowned (in the sea). God did not do injustice to them, but they had wronged themselves
29|41|The belief of considering other things as one's guardians besides God is as feeble as a spider's web. The spider's web is the frailest of all dwellings, if only they knew it
29|42|God knows whatever they worship besides Him; He is the Majestic and All-wise
29|43|These are parables which We tell to human being, but only the learned ones understand them
29|44|God has created the heavens and the earth for a genuine purpose. In this there is evidence (of the truth) for the believers
29|45|(Muhammad), recite to them what has been revealed to you in the Book and be steadfast in prayer; prayer keeps one away from indecency and evil. It is the greatest act of worshipping God. God knows what you do
29|46|Do not argue with the People of the Book except only by the best manner, except the unjust among them. Tell them, "We believe in what is revealed to us and to you. Our Lord and your Lord is one. We have submitted ourselves to His will
29|47|We have revealed the Book to you. Some of the People of the Book and some of the pagans also believe in it. No one rejects Our revelations except the infidels
29|48|You were not able to read or write before the Quran was revealed to you; otherwise, the followers of falsehood would have tried to confuse the matter
29|49|In fact, the Quran consists of illustrious verses that exist in the hearts of those who have knowledge. No one rejects Our revelations except the unjust ones
29|50|They say, "Why a miracle is not sent to him from his Lord." Say, "Miracles are in the hands of God. I am simply a warner
29|51|Is it not enough for them that We have revealed the Book to you to be recited to them. It is a mercy and a reminder for the believers
29|52|Say, "God is sufficient as a witness between me and you. He knows all that is in the heavens and the earth." Those who have faith in falsehood and disbelieve in God are certainly lost
29|53|They demand you to bring upon them torment immediately. Had not the time been fixed, the torment would certainly have approached them. It would have come to them suddenly and they would not have even realized how it came
29|54|They demand you to bring upon them the torment immediately. Hell will certainly engulf the unbelievers
29|55|They will be told on the Day of Judgment, when the torment will surround them from all sides, "Suffer the consequences of your deeds
29|56|My believing servants, My land is vast. Worship Me alone
29|57|Every soul will experience the agony of death and to Me you will all return
29|58|We shall give mansions in Paradise wherein streams flow to the righteously striving believers and therein they will live forever. How blessed is the reward of the hard working people
29|59|who have exercised patience and who have had trust in their Lord
29|60|There are many living creatures which do not carry their sustenance, but God provides them and you with sustenance. He is All-hearing and All-knowing
29|61|If you ask them, "Who has created the heavens and the earth and has subdued the sun and moon?" They will say, "God has done it." So why are they wandering about
29|62|God increases the sustenance of whichever of His servants He wants and He determines their share. God has the knowledge of all things
29|63|If you ask them, "Who has sent down water from the sky to revive the dead earth?" They will say, "God has done it." Say, "It is only God who deserves all praise, but many of them do not understand
29|64|The worldly life is not more than a childish game. It is the life hereafter which will be the real life, if only they knew it
29|65|When they sail in a boat, they sincerely pray to God with pure faith. But when We bring them safely to land, they start considering things equal to God
29|66|Let them be ungrateful to what We have granted them. Let them enjoy themselves, but they will soon know (the consequences of their deeds)
29|67|Have the (pagans) not seen that We have made the holy precinct a safe place while all the people around are suffering terror. Do they believe in falsehood and disbelieve in God's bounties
29|68|Who is more unjust than one who invents falsehood against God or rejects the Truth after it has come to him? Is not hell the dwelling for the disbelievers
29|69|We shall certainly guide those who strive for Our cause to Our path. God is certainly with the righteous ones
30|1|Alif. Lam. Mim
30|2|The Romans have been defeated in a nearby land and after this defeat
30|3|(within a few years) they will be victorious
30|4|All matters of the past and future are in the hands of God. The believers will enjoy the help of God on that Day
30|5|He helps whomever He wants. He is Majestic and All-merciful
30|6|This is the promise of God. God does not ignore His promise, but many people do not know
30|7|They only know the superficial realities of the worldly life and they are unaware of the life to come
30|8|Have they not thought that God has not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them but for a genuine purpose to exist for an appointed term? Many people do not believe in their meeting with their Lord
30|9|Have they not travelled through the land to see how terrible was the end of the people who lived before them. The people who lived before them were stronger than them in might, in tilling, and in developing the earth. Our Messengers came to them with clear miracles. God did not do an injustice to them but they wronged themselves
30|10|The end of the evil-doers was terrible, for they had rejected the revelations of God and mocked them
30|11|God begins the creation then causes it to turn back and to Him you will all return
30|12|On the day when the Hour of Doom comes, the criminals will despair
30|13|None of the idols will intercede for them and they will reject their idols
30|14|When that day comes, (people) will be separated from one another
30|15|The righteously striving believers will happily live in paradise
30|16|However, the disbelievers, who called Our revelations and the Day of Judgment lies, will be brought into torment
30|17|Glory belongs to God all the time, in the evening and in the morning
30|18|To Him belongs all the thanks giving which takes place in the heavens and the earth, in the evenings and the noontime
30|19|He brings forth the living from the dead, takes out the dead from the living, and revives the earth from its death. Thus, you will all be brought back to life again
30|20|Some evidence of His existence are His creating you from clay and from that you became human beings scattered all around
30|21|His creating spouses for you out of yourselves so that you might take comfort in them and His creating love and mercy among you. In this there is evidence (of the truth) for the people who (carefully) think
30|22|Other evidence of His existence are the creation of the heavens and the earth and the differences of languages and colors. In this there is evidence (of the truth) for the worlds (mankind)
30|23|Your sleeping during the night and in the day your seeking His favors are evidence (of the truth) for the people who have hearing
30|24|Also, of the evidence of His existence are His showing you lightening which gives you fear and hope and His sending water down from the sky which revives the earth after its death. In this there is evidence (of the truth) for the people of understanding
30|25|Some other evidence of His existence is that both the heavens and the earth stand firm at His command. When He will call you from the earth, you will start to come out
30|26|Everyone in the heavens and the earth belongs to Him and is subservient to Him
30|27|It is He who begins the creation, then, turns it back. For Him this is very easy. All the exalted attributes in the heavens and the earth belong to Him. He is the Majestic and All-wise
30|28|God has told you this parable about yourselves: Could your slaves share your wealth equally with you and could you fear them as you fear yourselves? Thus, do We clarify the evidence (of the truth) for the people of understanding
30|29|In fact, the unjust have followed their desires without knowledge. Who will guide those whom God has caused to go astray? No one will be their helper
30|30|(Muhammad), be devoted to the upright religion. It is harmonious with the nature which God has designed for people. The design of God cannot be altered. Thus is the upright religion, but many people do not know
30|31|Turn in repentance to Him. Have fear of Him. Be steadfast in your prayer. Do not be like the pagans
30|32|who have divided themselves into various religious sects, each one happy with their own belief
30|33|When people face hardship, they begin praying to their Lord and turn in repentance to Him. When they receive mercy from Him, a group of them begin to consider things equal to God
30|34|because of their ingratitude for what We have given them. Let them enjoy themselves, but they will soon know (the consequences of their deeds)
30|35|Have We sent them any authority to speak in support of their idols
30|36|When people receive mercy, they are happy with it. However, when hardship befalls them because of their own deeds, they despair
30|37|Have they not seen how God increases the livelihood of whomever He wants and determines his share. In this there is evidence (of the truth) for the believing people
30|38|Give the relatives, the destitute, and the needy travellers their share (of charity). It is better for those who want to please God and they will have everlasting happiness
30|39|God will not allow to increase whatever illegal interest you try to receive in order to increase your wealth at the expense of people's property. Whatever amount of zakat you give to please God will be doubled (for you)
30|40|It is God who has created you and given you sustenance. He will make you die and will bring you back to life. Can any of your idols do such things? God is too Exalted to be considered equal to anything else
30|41|Evil has spread over the land and the sea because of human deeds and through these God will cause some people to suffer so that perhaps they will return to Him
30|42|(Muhammad), tell them, "Travel through the land to see how terrible was the end of those who lived before. Many of them were pagans
30|43|Be devoted to the upright religion before the coming of the inevitable day when no one can escape from God and people will either be sent to Paradise or hell
30|44|Those who disbelieve do so against their own souls. Those who do good pave the way for their own benefit
30|45|God will reward the righteously striving believers through His favor. He does not love the unbelievers
30|46|Some evidence of His existence is His sending the glad-news-bearing winds so that He would let you to receive His mercy, cause the ships to sail by His command, and let you seek His favor so that perhaps you would give Him thanks
30|47|(Muhammad), We had sent before you Our Messengers to their people. The Messengers showed them clear miracles and We took revenge on the criminals. It was necessary for Us to help the believers
30|48|It is God who sends the winds to raise the clouds. He spreads them in the sky as He wants, then He intensifies them, and then you can see the rain coming down from the cloud. When He sends it down upon whichever of His servants He wants, they rejoice
30|49|at the rainfall, though before that they had been in despair
30|50|Look at the traces of the mercy of God, how He has revived the dead earth. God revives the dead; He has power over all things
30|51|Even if We had sent the wind and caused (the plants) to turn yellow and to fade away, they would still have remained in disbelief
30|52|You cannot make the dead listen, nor the deaf hear. Thus, they, (the disbelievers), turn away on their heels
30|53|You cannot guide the straying blind. You can make no one listen except those who believe in Our revelations and are Muslims
30|54|It is God who has created you weak, then, given you strength after your weakness and caused you to become weak and old after being strong. He creates whatever He wants. He is All-knowing and All-powerful
30|55|On the day when the Hour of Doom comes, the criminals will swear that they have remained (in their graves) for no more than an hour. They had been inventing lies in this way
30|56|Those who have received knowledge and have faith will say, "By the decree of God, you have remained for the exact period which was mentioned in the Book of God about the Day of Resurrection. This is the Day of Resurrection, but you did not know
30|57|The excuses of the unjust on this day will be of no avail to them and they will not be able to please God
30|58|We have told people various parables in this Quran. Even if you had shown them a miracle, the unbelievers would have said, "You are only the followers of falsehood
30|59|Thus does God seal the hearts of those who do not know
30|60|Be patient. The promise of God is certainly true. Let not the faithless make you despair of the promise of God
31|1|Alif. Lam. Mim
31|2|These are the verses of the Book of wisdom
31|3|A guidance and mercy for the righteous
31|4|people who are steadfast in prayer, pay the religious tax, and have firm belief in the life to come
31|5|They follow the guidance of their Lord and they will have everlasting happiness
31|6|(In an attempt to show that God's revelations are only ancient legends) some people pay for meaningless tales to draw others attention away from the Quran without knowledge and treat as a matter of fun. They will suffer a humiliating torment
31|7|When Our revelations are recited to them, they turn back on their heels out of pride as if they did not hear them or their ears had been sealed off. Warn them of the painful torment
31|8|The righteously striving believers will enter Paradise
31|9|wherein they will live forever. It is the true promise of God. He is Majestic and All-wise
31|10|He has created the heavens without pillar as you can see, fixed the mountains on earth so that it may not shake you away, and settled therein all types of living creatures. We have sent down water from the sky and made all kinds of plants grow in gracious pairs
31|11|This is the creation of God. Show me what those whom you consider equal to God have created. In fact, the unjust ones are in plain error
31|12|We gave wisdom to Luqman so that he would give thanks to God. Those who give thanks to God do so for their own good. Those who are ungrateful should know that God is Self-sufficient and Praiseworthy
31|13|Luqman advised his son telling him, "My son, do not consider anything equal to God, for it is the greatest injustice
31|14|(Concerning his parents), We advised the man, whose mother bears him with great pain and breast-feeds him for two years, to give thanks to Me first and then to them, to Me all things proceed
31|15|If they try to force you to consider things equal to Me, which you cannot justify, equal to Me, do not obey them. Maintain lawful relations with them in this world and follow the path of those who turn in repentance to Me. To Me you will all return and I shall tell you all that you have done
31|16|My son, God keeps the records of all the good and evil deeds, even if they are as small as a grain of mustard seed, hidden in a rock or in the heavens or the earth. God is subtle and All-aware
31|17|My son, be steadfast in prayer. Make others do good. Prevent them from doing evil. Be patient in hardship. Patience comes from faith and determination
31|18|Do not scornfully turn your face away from people. Do not walk around puffed-up with pride; God does not love arrogant and boastful people
31|19|Be moderate in your walking and your talking. The most unpleasant sound is the braying of donkeys
31|20|Have you not seen that God has made all that is in the heavens and the earth, subservient to you (human beings), and has extended and perfected for you His apparent and unseen bounties? Some people argue about God without knowledge, guidance, or an enlightening book
31|21|When they are told to follow what God has revealed to them, they say, "We shall only follow our father's way of life." Will they follow it even if it is Satan who is calling them to the burning torment
31|22|Whoever submits himself to the will of God in righteousness has certainly achieved a strong-hold. The end of all things is in the hands of God
31|23|(Muhammad), do not let the disbelievers grieve you. To Us they will all return and We shall tell them all about what they have done. God knows best what is in everyone's hearts
31|24|We shall allow them to enjoy themselves for a short while, then force them into severe torment
31|25|If you ask them, "Who has created the heavens and the earth," they will certainly say, "God has created them." Say, "It is only God who deserves all praise, but most of them do not know
31|26|To God belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. He is Self-sufficient and Praiseworthy
31|27|If all the trees in the earth were pens and the ocean, with seven more oceans, were ink still these could not suffice to record all the Words of God. God is Majestic and All-wise
31|28|For God your creation and your resurrection are only like the creation and resurrection of one soul. God is All-hearing and All-seeing
31|29|Have you not seen that God causes the night to enter into the day and the day into the night. He has made the sun and moon subservient (to Himself). Each moves (in an orbit) for an appointed time. God is certainly All-aware of what you do
31|30|This is because God is the supreme Truth and whatever they worship besides Him is falsehood. God is the Most High and the Most Great
31|31|Have you not seen that the ships sail in the ocean through the bounty of God so that He may show you the evidence (of His existence). There is evidence (of the truth) in this for every forbearing and grateful one
31|32|When the waves cover them like shadows, they pray to God with sincerity in their religion, but when We bring them safely to land, only some of them follow the right path. No one rejects Our revelations except the treacherous ungrateful ones
31|33|Mankind, have fear of your Lord and the day when a father will be of no avail to his son, nor will a son carry any part of the burden of his father. The promise of God is true. Do not let the worldly life deceive you nor let your pride deceive you about God
31|34|Only God has the knowledge of the coming of the Hour of Doom. He sends down the rain and knows what is in the wombs. No soul is aware of what it will achieve tomorrow and no soul knows in which land it will die. God is All-knowing and All-aware
32|1|Alif. Lam. Mim
32|2|There is no doubt that this Book is revealed by the Lord of the Universe
32|3|Do they say that he, (Muhammad), has invented it? No, it is the truth from your Lord so that you will warn the people who have not received a warning before you. Perhaps they will seek guidance
32|4|God is the one who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days, then He established His dominion over the Throne. No one besides Him is your guardian or intercessor. Will you then not take heed
32|5|He sends the regulation of the affair from the heavens to the earth, then on the day which is equal to one thousand years of yours, it will ascend to Him
32|6|He knows the unseen and the seen. He is Majestic and All-merciful
32|7|It is He Who created everything in the best manner and began the creation of the human being from clay
32|8|He made His offspring come into existence from an extract of insignificant fluid
32|9|then He gave it proper shape and blew His spirit in it. He made ears, eyes and hearts for you, but you give Him very little thanks
32|10|They have said, "How can we be brought to life again after we have been lost in the earth?" In fact, they have no faith in the Day of Judgment
32|11|(Muhammad), say, "The angel of death, who is appointed over everyone of you, will cause you to die and to your Lord you will all return
32|12|Would that you could see (on the Day of Judgment) that criminals, with their heads hanging down before their Lord, saying, "Our Lord, we have seen and heard. Send us back to act righteously. Now we have strong faith
32|13|Had We wanted, We could have given guidance to every soul, but My decree, that hell will be filled-up with jinn and people, has already been executed
32|14|They will be told, "Suffer on this Day of Judgment. For your having ignored it, We have ignored you. Suffer everlasting torment for your evil deeds
32|15|The only people who believe in Our revelations are those who, when reminded about them, bow down in prostration and glorify their Lord with His praise without pride
32|16|Their sides give-up rest in beds in order to pray before their Lord in fear and hope. They spend for the cause of God out of what we have given them
32|17|No soul knows what delight awaits them as the reward for their deeds
32|18|Is a believer equal to an evil-doer? They are not equal at all
32|19|The righteously striving believers will have Paradise for their dwelling as the reward of their good deeds
32|20|However, the dwelling of the sinful ones will be hell fire. Each time they try to come out, they will be turned back with this remark, "Suffer the torment of the fire which you had called a lie
32|21|We shall certainly make them suffer worldly torment before suffering the great torment so that perhaps they may return to Us
32|22|Who are more unjust than those who are reminded of the revelation of their Lord, but have ignored them? We will take revenge on the criminal
32|23|We gave the Book to Moses - do not have any doubt about the Day of Judgment - and made it a guide for the children of Israel
32|24|We appointed some of the Israelites as leaders for their exercising patience to guide the others to Our commands. They had firm belief in Our revelations
32|25|Your Lord will issue His decree about their (believers and disbeliever's) differences on the Day of Judgment
32|26|Was it not a lesson for them, (the unbelievers), that We destroyed the many generations living before them among whose ruined dwellings they are now walking. In this there is many evidence (of the truth). Will they not then listen
32|27|Have they not seen that We drive the water to the barren land and cause crops to grow which they and their cattle consume? Why, then, they will not see
32|28|They say, "If what you say is true, when will the final triumph come
32|29|Say, "On the day of the final triumph, the faith of the disbelievers will be of no avail to them, nor will they be given any respite
32|30|Turn away from them and wait. They are, also, waiting
33|1|Prophet, have fear of God and do not yield to the infidels and hypocrites. God is All-knowing and All-wise
33|2|Follow what has been revealed to you from your Lord. God is All-aware of what you do
33|3|Trust in God and be sure that He is a Sufficient Guardian
33|4|God has not created two hearts inside any one human being. God does not consider your wives whom you renounce by zihar as your mothers nor those whom you adopt as your sons. These are only words of your mouth. God tells the Truth and shows the right path
33|5|Call them sons of their own fathers. It is more just in the eyes of God. If you do not know their fathers, they are your brothers and friends in religion. You will not be responsible for your mistakes, but you will be responsible for what you do intentionally. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
33|6|The Prophet has more authority over the believers than themselves. His wives are their mothers. The relatives are closer to each other, according to the Book of God, than the believers and the emigrants. However, you may show kindness to your guardians. This also is written in the Book
33|7|We had a solemn covenant with you (Muhammad), and the Prophets: Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Jesus, the son of Mary
33|8|This was a firm agreement. God will ask the truthful ones about their truthfulness and prepare a painful torment for the disbelievers
33|9|Believers, recall God's favor to you when the army attacked you. We sent a wind and the armies, which you did not see, to support you. God sees all that you do
33|10|Eyes became dull and hearts almost reached the throat when they attacked you from above and below and you started to think of God with suspicion
33|11|There the believers were tested and tremendously shaken
33|12|It was there that the hypocrites and those whose hearts were sick, said, "The promise of God and His Messenger has proved to be nothing but deceit
33|13|It was there that a group of them said, "People of Yathrib, turn back for there is no place for you to stay." Another group, asking for the Prophet's permission, said, "Our homes are defenseless." In fact, they were not defenseless. They only wanted to run away
33|14|Had the army of the enemies invaded their homes and asked them to give-up their religion, they would have yielded to them without delay
33|15|They had certainly promised God that they would not turn away. To promise God is certainly a (great) responsibility
33|16|(Muhammad), tell them, "Running away will never be of any benefit to you even if you run away from death or being killed. Still you would not be able to enjoy yourselves except for a short while
33|17|Say, "Who can prevent God from punishing you or granting you mercy? They will not find anyone besides God as their guardian or helper
33|18|God certainly knows those among you who create obstacles (on the way that leads to God) and those who say to their brothers, 'Come quickly to us' and very rarely take part in the fighting
33|19|They are niggardly in spending for you. When fear comes, you can see them looking at you, their eyes rolling about like to faint because of the agony of death. When their fear subsides, they start to bite you with their sharp tongues. They are miserly in spending for a virtuous cause and have no faith. God has turned their deeds devoid of all virtue. This was not at all difficult for God
33|20|They think that the confederate tribes have not yet gone. If the confederate tribes were to attack them, they would have wished to be left alone among the bedouin Arabs where they would only follow the news about you. Even if they were with you, only a few of them would take part in the fight
33|21|The Messenger of God is certainly a good example for those of you who have hope in God and in the Day of Judgment and who remember God very often
33|22|On seeing the confederate tribes, the believers said, "This is what God and His Messenger had promised us. The promise of God and His Messenger is true." This only strengthens their faith and their desire of submission to the will of God
33|23|Among the believers there are people who are true in their promise to God. Some of them have already passed away and some of them are waiting. They never yield to any change
33|24|God will certainly reward the truthful ones for their truthfulness and punish or pardon the hypocrites as He wishes. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
33|25|God repelled the unbelievers in their rage. They could not achieve anything good. God rendered sufficient support to the believers in fighting. God is All-powerful and Majestic
33|26|God brought down those among the People of the Book who had supported the confederate tribes from their castles and struck their hearts with terror. You did away with some of them and captured the others
33|27|God made you inherit their land, houses, property, and a land on which you had never walked. God has power over all things
33|28|Prophet, tell your wives, "If you want the worldly life and its beauty, I shall allow you to enjoy it and set you free in an honorable manner
33|29|but if you want the pleasure of God, His Messenger, and the life hereafter, know that God has prepared a great reward for the righteous ones among you
33|30|Wives of the Prophet, if anyone among you commits indecency, her torment will be double. This is not at all difficult for God
33|31|To whoever of you obeys God and His Messenger and acts righteously, We will give double reward and a honorable sustenance
33|32|Wives of the Prophet, you are not like other women. If you have fear of God, do not be tender in your speech lest people whose hearts are sick may lust after you
33|33|Do not display yourselves after the manner of the (pre-Islamic) age of darkness. Be steadfast in the prayer, pay the religious tax, and obey God and His Messenger. People of the house, God wants to remove all kinds of uncleanliness from you and to purify you thoroughly
33|34|Wives of the Prophet, remember the revelations of God and Words of wisdom that are recited in your homes. God is Most Kind and All-aware
33|35|God has promised forgiveness and great rewards to the Muslim men and the Muslim women, the believing men and the believing women, the obedient men and the obedient women, the truthful men and the truthful women, the forbearing men and the forbearing women, the humble men and the humble women, the alms-giving men and the alms-giving women, the fasting men and the fasting women, the chaste men and the chaste women, and the men and women who remember God very often
33|36|The believing men and women must not feel free to do something in their affairs other than that which has been already decided for them by God and His Messenger. One who disobeys God and His Messenger is in plain error
33|37|Say to the person to whom you and God have granted favor, "Keep your wife and have fear of God. You hide within yourself what God wants to make public. You are afraid of people while it is God whom one should fear." When Zayd set her free, We gave her in marriage to you so that the believers would not face difficulties about the wives of their adopted sons when they are divorced. God's decree has already been issued
33|38|The Prophet cannot be blamed for carrying out the commands of God. It was the tradition of God with those who lived before. The command of God has already been decreed and ordained
33|39|Those who preach the message of God and are humble before Him should not be afraid of anyone besides God. God is Sufficient in keeping the account
33|40|Muhammad is not the father of any of your males. He is the Messenger of God and the last Prophet. God has the knowledge of all things
33|41|Believers, remember God very often
33|42|and glorify Him both in the mornings and in the evenings
33|43|It is He who forgives you and His angels pray for you so that He will take you out of darkness into light. God is All-merciful to the believers
33|44|On the day when they will be brought into the presence of their Lord, their greeting to each other will be, "Peace be with you." God has prepared an honorable reward for them
33|45|Prophet, We have sent you as a witness, a bearer of glad news, a warner
33|46|a preacher for God by His permission and as a shining torch
33|47|Give glad news to the believers of their receiving great favor from God
33|48|Do not yield to the disbelievers or the hypocrites. Ignore their annoying you. Trust in God. God is your all Sufficient Protector
33|49|Believers, if you marry believing women and then divorce them before the consummation of the marriage, they do not have to observe the waiting period. Give them their provisions and set them free in an honorable manner
33|50|Prophet, We have made lawful for you your wives whom you have given their dowry, slave girls whom God has given to you as gifts, the daughters of your uncles and aunts, both paternal and maternal, who have migrated with you. The believing woman, who has offered herself to the Prophet and whom the Prophet may want to marry, will be specially for him, not for other believers. We knew what to make obligatory for them concerning their wives and slave girls so that you would face no hardship (because we have given distinction to you over the believers). God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
33|51|You may refuse whichever (of the woman who offer themselves to you) as you want and accept whichever of them you wish. There is no blame on you if you marry (one whom you had refused previously). This would be more delightful for them. They should not be grieved but should be happy with whatever you have given to every one of them. God knows what is in your hearts. God is All-knowing and All-forbearing
33|52|Besides these, other women are not lawful for you to marry nor is it lawful for you to exchange your wives for the wives of others (except for the slave girls), even though they may seem attractive to you. God is watchful over all things
33|53|Believers, do not enter the houses of the Prophet for a meal without permission. if you are invited, you may enter, but be punctual (so that you will not be waiting while the meal is being prepared). When you have finished eating, leave his home. Do not sit around chatting among yourselves. This will annoy the Prophet but he will feel embarrassed to tell you. God does not feel embarrassed to tell you the truth. When you want to ask something from the wives of the Prophet, ask them from behind the curtain. This would be more proper for you and for them. You are not supposed to trouble the Prophet or to ever marry his wives after his death, for this would be a grave offense in the sight of God
33|54|Whether you reveal something or hid it, God has the knowledge of all things
33|55|It will not be an offense for the wives of the Prophet (not to observe the modest dress) in the presence of their fathers, sons, brothers, sons of their brothers and sisters, their own women, and their slave-girls. They should have fear of God. God witness all things
33|56|God showers His blessings upon the Prophet and the angels seek forgiveness for him. Believers, pray for the Prophet and greet him with, "Peace be with you
33|57|Those who annoy God and His Messenger will be condemned by God in this life and in the life to come. He has prepared for them a humiliating torment
33|58|Those who annoy the believing men and women without reason will bear the sin for a false accusation, a manifest offense
33|59|Prophet, tell your wives, daughters, and the wives of the believers to cover their bosoms and breasts. This will make them distinguishable from others and protect them from being annoyed. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
33|60|If the hypocrites, those whose hearts are sick and those who encourage the spread of evil in the city, will not desist, We shall arouse you against them and they will only be allowed to be your neighbors for a short while
33|61|They will be condemned wherever they are and will be sized and done away with for good
33|62|This was the tradition of God with those who lived before. There will never be any change in the tradition of God
33|63|(Muhammad), people ask you about the Day of Judgment. Say, "Only God has knowledge about it. Perhaps the Hour of Doom will soon come to pass
33|64|God has condemned the unbelievers and prepared for them a burning torment
33|65|wherein they will live forever without being able to find any guardian or helper
33|66|On the day when their faces will be turned from side to side on the fire, they will say, "Would that we had obeyed God and the Messenger
33|67|They will say, "Lord, we obeyed our chiefs and elders and they caused us to go astray
33|68|Lord, make them to suffer double torment and subject them to the greatest condemnation
33|69|Believers, do not be like those who annoyed Moses. God proved him to be innocent of what they had said about him. Moses was a honorable person in the sight of God
33|70|Believers, have fear of God and speak righteous words
33|71|God will reform your deeds and forgive your sins. One who obeys God and His Messenger will certainly achieve a great success
33|72|We offered Our Trust (Our deputation) to the heavens, to the earth, and to the mountains, but they could not bear this burden and were afraid to accept it. Mankind was able to accept this offer but he was unjust to himself and ignorant of the significance of this Trust
33|73|(As a result of this) God will punish the hypocrites and the pagans, but He will accept the repentance of the believers. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
34|1|It is only God who deserves all praise. To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth and it is only He who deserves to be praised in the life to come. He is All-wise and All-aware
34|2|He knows all that enters the earth, all that comes out of it, all that descends from the sky and all that ascends to it. He is All-merciful and All-forgiving
34|3|The disbelievers have said, "There will be no Hour of Doom." Say, "By my Lord, it certainly will come. My Lord knows the unseen. Not even an atom's weight in the heavens or the earth remains hidden from Him. Nothing exists greater or smaller than this without its record in the illustrious Book
34|4|God will certainly reward the righteously striving believers. These are the ones who will receive forgiveness and honorable sustenance
34|5|However, those who try to challenge Our revelations will face the most painful torment
34|6|Those who have been given knowledge will see that whatever has been revealed to you from your Lord is the truth and that it guides to the straight path of the Majestic and Praiseworthy One
34|7|The unbelievers have said, "Should we tell you about a man who says that you will be brought back to life again after your having been completely disintegrated
34|8|Has he invented this falsehood against God or is he possessed by jinn?" However, those who do not have any faith in the life to come will suffer torment for their serious error
34|9|Have they not seen the heavens and the earth in front and behind them. Had We wanted, We could have caused the earth to swallow them up or made a part of the sky fall upon them. In this there is evidence (of the truth) for every repenting person
34|10|We granted David a favor by commanding the mountains and birds to sing Our praise along with him and softened iron for him
34|11|so that he could make coats of mail and properly measure their rings. We told him and his people to act righteously. We are Well-Aware of what you do
34|12|(We made subservient to) Solomon the wind that travelled a month's journey in the morning and a month's journey in the evening. We made a stream of brass flow for him and some of the jinn worked for him by his Lord's command. We would make whichever of them (jinn) who turned away from Our command to suffer a burning torment
34|13|They would make for him anything that he wanted like fortresses, statues, large basins like reservoirs, and huge immovable cooking pots. It was said, "Family of David, worship and act gratefully. Only few of my servants are grateful
34|14|When We decreed that Solomon should die, no one knew of his death except for a creeping creature of the earth who ate-up his staff. When he fell down, the jinn realized that if they had known about the unseen, they would not have remained in such a humiliating torment for so long
34|15|There was evidence (of the truth) for the people of Sheba in their homeland. (We gave them) two gardens, one on the left and one on the right and (told them), "Consume the sustenance which your Lord has given to you and give Him thanks. You have a blessed land and an All-forgiving Lord
34|16|They ignored (the evidence) and We sent to them a flood, arising from a broken dam. Nothing was left in their gardens but bitter fruits, some tamarisk and a few lotus trees
34|17|This was how We recompensed them for their ungratefulness and thus do We recompense the ungrateful ones
34|18|We established between them and the town that We had blessed, other towns nearby, and thus made it easier to travel. We told them, "Travel there safely day and night
34|19|They said, "Lord, make the distances of our journeys longer." They did injustice to themselves and We turned their existence into ancient tales by making them disintegrate totally. In this there is evidence (of the truth) for every forbearing and grateful person
34|20|Iblis (satan) made his judgment about them to come true. They all followed them except a believing group among them
34|21|He did not have any authority over them except to the extent that would allow Us to know who had faith in the life to come and who had doubts about it. Your Lord is a Guard over all things
34|22|Say, (Muhammad), "Ask help from those whom you worship besides God. They do not possess an atom's weight in the heavens and the earth, have no share therein, nor will any of their idols be able to support them
34|23|No intercession with Him will be of any benefit except that of those whom He has granted permission. The angels cannot intercede. They are always submissive to their Lord. Fear vanishes from their heart when (they receive a message from their Lord). They ask each other, "What did your Lord say?" Others answer, "He spoke the Truth. He is the Most High and the Most Great
34|24|Say, "Who provides you with sustenance from the heavens and the earth?" Say, "It is God. Only one group among us has the true guidance. The others must certainly be in plain error
34|25|Say, "You will not be questioned about our sins nor shall we about your deeds
34|26|Say, "Our Lord will gather us all together and issue the true Judgment about our differences. He is the Best Judge and All-knowing
34|27|Say, "Show me those whom you have related to God as His partner. He is too Exalted to have any partners. He is the Majestic and All-wise God
34|28|We have sent you as a bearer of glad news and a warner to the whole of mankind, but most people do not know
34|29|They say, "When will the Day of Judgment be if what you say is true
34|30|Say, "That day has already been decreed for you and you cannot change the time of its coming even by a single hour
34|31|The unbelievers have said, "We shall never believe in this Quran nor in the Bible." Would that you could see the unjust having been halted in the presence of their Lord, exchanging words among themselves. The oppressed among them will say to their oppressors, "Had it not been for you, we would certainly have been believers
34|32|The suppressing ones will say to the oppressed ones, "Did we prevent you from having guidance after it had come to you? In fact, you yourselves were criminals
34|33|The oppressed ones will say to them, "It was you who planned night and day, ordering us to disbelieve God, and consider other things equal to Him." They will hide their regret on seeing their torment. We shall chain the necks of the disbelievers. Can they be recompensed with other than what they deserved for their deeds
34|34|Every time We sent a warner to a town, the rich ones therein said (to Our Messenger), "We have no faith in what you have brought (to us)
34|35|We are the ones who have more wealth and children and we shall suffer no punishment
34|36|Say, "My Lord increases and determines the sustenance of whomever He wants, but most people do not know
34|37|Your property and children cannot bring you closer to Us. Only those who believe and act righteously will have double reward for their deeds and will live in secure mansions
34|38|Those who try to challenge Our revelations will be driven into torment
34|39|Say, "It is my Lord who determines and increases the sustenance of whomever He wants. He will replace whatever you spend for His cause and He is the best Sustainer
34|40|On the day when God will rise them all together and ask the angels, "Had these people been worshipping you
34|41|They will reply, "All glory belongs to you. You are our guardian, not they. They had been worshipping the jinn and most of them had strong faith
34|42|None of them can help or harm each other on this day. We shall tell the unjust ones, "Suffer the torment of the fire which you had called a lie
34|43|When Our illustrious revelations are recited to them, they say, "This man only wants to prevent you from worshipping what your father's had worshipped." They say "This, (the Quran), is a mere invented lie." The unbelievers have said about the truth when it came to them, "This only is plain magic
34|44|We did not send to them, (the pagans), any books to study nor a Messenger to warn them, and those who lived before them had rejected the Truth
34|45|These people have not one tenth of power or wealth that we had given to those who lived before them. They called Our Messengers liars. Thus, how terrible was My vengeance
34|46|Say, "I advise you to believe only in One God and worship Him individually or two people together." Think carefully; your companion is not possessed by jinn. He is only warning you of the coming severe torment
34|47|Say, "Whatever reward I ask you (for my preaching) will be for your own good. No one can reward me except God. He is the Witness over all things
34|48|Say, "My Lord speaks the Truth. He has the knowledge of the unseen
34|49|Say, "The truth has come. Falsehood has vanished and it will not come back again
34|50|Say, "If I go astray it will only be against my own soul, but if I receive guidance, it will be through my Lord's revelations." He is All-hearing and Omnipresent
34|51|Would that you could see how the unbelievers will be terrified by death from which they cannot escape. They will be seized from a nearby place
34|52|and then they will say, "We have faith in the Quran." How can they have any faith when they are far away from this world
34|53|They had rejected it in their worldly life and expressed disbelief at the unseen (Day of Judgment), considering it less than a remote possibility
34|54|A gulf will exist between them and their desires on the Day of Judgment like the similar people who lived before. They, too, had lived in doubt and uncertainty (about the life hereafter)
35|1|All praise belongs to God, the creator of the heavens and the earth who has made the angels Messengers of two or three or four wings. He increases the creation as He wills. God has power over all things
35|2|No one can withhold whatever mercy God grants to the human being, nor can one release whatever He withholds. He is Majestic and All-wise
35|3|People, remember the bounty of God that He has granted to you. Is their any creator besides God who could provide you with sustenance from the heavens and the earth? He is the only God. Where then can you turn away
35|4|If they reject you, other Messengers had certainly been rejected before you. All decisions are in the hands of God
35|5|People, the promise of God is true. Let not the worldly life deceive you. Let not the devil deceive you about God
35|6|Satan is your enemy. Thus, consider him as your enemy. His party only calls you to make you the dwellers of the burning fire
35|7|The unbelievers will suffer a severe torment, but the righteously striving believers will receive forgiveness and a great reward
35|8|Can one whose evil deeds seem attractive and virtuous to him (be compared to a truly righteous person)? God guides or causes to go astray whomever He wants. (Muhammad), do not be grieved because of their disbelief. God knows well whatever they do
35|9|It is God who sends the winds to raise the clouds. We then drive them unto barren areas and revive the dead earth. (The Resurrection) will also be executed in the same way
35|10|Whoever seeks honor should know that all honor belongs to God. Good words (worship) will be presented before Him and He will accept good deeds. Those who make evil plans will suffer intense torment. Their evil plans are doomed to destruction
35|11|God created you from clay which He then turned into a living germ and made you into pairs. No female conceives or delivers without His knowledge. No one grows older nor can anything be reduced from one's life without having its record in the Book. This is not at all difficult for God
35|12|The two oceans, one sweet and the other salty, are not alike. From each you can eat fresh meat and obtain ornaments to use. You see ships ploughing their way through them so that you may seek His favor and give Him thanks
35|13|He causes the night to enter into the day and the day to enter into the night. He has made subservient to Himself the sun and moon, each moving in an orbit for an appointed time. Such is God, your Lord, to whom belongs the kingdom. Those whom you worship besides Him do not posses even a single straw
35|14|They will not listen to your prayers if you pray to them. Even if they would listen, they would not be able to answer you. On the Day of Judgment they will reject your worship of them. Not even an expert reporter can tell you the truth in the way that God can do
35|15|People, you are always in need of God and God is Self-sufficient and Praiseworthy
35|16|He could replace you by a new creation if He decided to
35|17|This would not cost God dear at all
35|18|No one will bear the burden of another. Even if an overburdened soul should ask another to bear a part of his burden, no one, not even a relative, will do so. (Muhammad), you can only warn those who have fear of their Lord without seeing Him and who are steadfast in prayer. Whoever purifies himself, does so for his own good. To God do all things return
35|19|The blind and the seeing are not alike
35|20|nor are darkness and light
35|21|nor shade and heat
35|22|nor are the living and the dead. God makes to listen whomever He wants. (Muhammad), you cannot make people in the graves to listen
35|23|You are simply a warner
35|24|We have sent you in all truth as a bearer of glad news and a warner. No nation who lived before was left without a warner
35|25|If they reject you, (know that) others who lived before them had also rejected their Messengers, Messengers who had brought them miracles, scriptures, and the enlightening Book
35|26|so I seized the unbelievers and how terrible was their torment
35|27|Have you not seen that God has sent water down from the sky, has produced fruits of various colors, and has made streaks of various colors in the mountains, white, red, and intense black
35|28|He has also created people, beasts, and cattle of various colors. Only God's knowledgeable servants fear Him. God is Majestic and All-pardoning
35|29|Those who recite the Book of God, who are steadfast in prayer and, who spend out of what We have given them for the cause of God, both in public and in private, have hope in an indestructible bargain
35|30|and in receiving their reward from God and in further favors. He is All-forgiving and All-appreciating
35|31|Whatever We have revealed to you from the Book is all truth. It confirms what was revealed before. God sees His servants and is All-aware of them
35|32|We gave the Book as an inheritance to Our chosen servants, among whom some are unjust against their souls, some are moderate, and some are exceedingly virtuous by the permission of God. This is indeed a great favor
35|33|They will enter the gardens of Eden wherein they will be decked with bracelets of gold, pearls, and silk garments
35|34|They will say, "It is only God who deserves all praise. He has removed all of our suffering. Our Lord is certainly All-forgiving and All-appreciating
35|35|It is He who has granted us, through His favor, an everlasting dwelling wherein we shall experience no hardship nor any fatigue
35|36|The unbelievers will dwell in hell. It will not be decreed for them to die nor will their torment be relieved. Thus do We recompense the ungrateful ones
35|37|Therein they will cry-out, "Lord, take us out of here. We shall act righteously and behave different to what we did before." They will be told, "Did We not allow you to live long enough for you to seek guidance? Did We not send a warner to you? Suffer (the torment). There is no one to help the unjust
35|38|God has knowledge of whatever is unseen in the heavens and the earth. He knows best what the hearts contain
35|39|It is He who has made you each other's successors on earth. Whoever disbelieves, does so against his own self. The disbelief of the unbelievers will only increase the anger of their Lord and will only cause them greater loss
35|40|(Muhammad), ask them, "Think about the idols which you worship besides God. Show me what part of the earth they have created. Do they have any share in the heavens? Has God sent them a Book to confirm their authority? In fact, whatever the unjust promise each other is nothing but deceit
35|41|God prevents the heavens and the earth from falling apart. If they do fall apart, then, no one besides Him can restore them. He is All-forbearing and All-forgiving
35|42|They solemnly swear that if a warner were to come to them, they would certainly have been better guided than any other nation. But when a warner came to them, it only increased their hatred
35|43|because of their pride in the land and their evil plots. Evil plots only affect the plotters. Do they expect anything other than (God's) tradition (torment) with those who lived before. You will never find any change in the tradition of God nor will you find any alteration in it
35|44|Have they not travelled (sufficiently) through the land to see how terrible was the end of the mightier people who lived before them. Nothing in the heavens or the earth can challenge God. God is All-knowing and All-powerful
35|45|Were God to punish people for their deeds immediately, not one creature would have survived on earth. However, He has given them a respite for an appointed time and when their term comes to an end, let it be known that God watches over His servants
36|1|I swear by Ya Sin
36|2|and the Quran, the Book of wisdom
36|3|that you (Muhammad) are a Messenger
36|4|and that you follow the right path
36|5|This is a revelation sent down from the Majestic and All-merciful
36|6|so that you may warn a people who are unaware because their fathers were not warned
36|7|(I swear) that most of them are doomed to be punished. They have no faith
36|8|We have enchained their necks up to their chins. Thus, they cannot bend their heads (to find their way)
36|9|We have set-up a barrier in front of and behind them and have made them blind. Thus, they cannot see
36|10|Whether you warn them or not, they will not believe
36|11|You should only warn those who follow the Quran and have fear of the Beneficent God without seeing Him. Give them the glad news of their receiving forgiveness and an honorable reward (from God)
36|12|It is We who bring the dead to life and records the deeds of human beings and their consequences (of continual effects). We keep everything recorded in an illustrious Book
36|13|Tell them the story of the people of the town to whom Messengers came
36|14|We sent them two Messengers whom they rejected. We supported them by sending a third one who told the people, "We are the Messengers (of God) who have been sent to you
36|15|The people said, "You are mere mortals like us and the Beneficent God has sent nothing. You are only liars
36|16|They said, "Our Lord knows that We are Messengers
36|17|who have been sent to you. Our only duty is to preach clearly to you
36|18|The people said, "We have ill omens about you. If you will not desist, we shall stone you and make you suffer a painful torment
36|19|The Messengers said, "This ill omen lies within yourselves. Will you then take heed? In fact, you are a transgressing people
36|20|A man came running from the farthest part of the city saying, "My people, follow the Messengers
36|21|Follow those who do not ask you for any reward and who are rightly guided
36|22|Why should I not worship God who has created me? To him you will all return
36|23|Should I worship other gods besides Him? If the Beneficent God was to afflict me with hardship, the intercession of the idols can be of no benefit to me nor could it rescue me from hardship
36|24|Had I worshipped things besides God, I would have been in manifest error
36|25|Messengers, listen to me. I believe in your Lord
36|26|(Having been murdered by the disbelievers) he was told to enter paradise
36|27|(wherein he said), "Would that people knew how my Lord has granted me forgiveness and honor
36|28|We did not send an army against his people from the heaven after his death nor did We need to send one
36|29|It was only a single blast which made them extinct
36|30|Woe to human beings! Whenever a Messenger came to them, they mocked him
36|31|Have they not seen how many generations, living before them, had We destroyed and they cannot ever come back to them
36|32|They will all be brought into Our presence together
36|33|Evidence (of the truth) for them is how We revived the dead earth
36|34|and produced therein grains from which they eat and established therein gardens of palms trees and vineyards and have made streams flow therein
36|35|so that they may consume the fruits and whatever their hands prepare. Will they not then be grateful
36|36|All glory belongs to the One Who has created pairs out of what grow from the earth, out of their soul and out of that which they do not know
36|37|Of the signs for them is how We separated the day from the night and thus they remained in darkness
36|38|how the sun moves in its orbit and this is the decree of the Majestic and All-knowing God
36|39|how We ordained the moon to pass through certain phases until it seems eventually to be like a bent twig
36|40|how the sun is not supposed to catch-up with the moon, nor is the night to precede the day. All of them are to float in a certain orbit
36|41|how We carried them and their offspring inside the laden Ark
36|42|and created for them similar things to ride
36|43|Had We wanted, We could have drowned them and nothing would have been able to help or rescue them
36|44|except Our mercy which could enable them to enjoy themselves for an appointed time
36|45|Whenever they are told to guard themselves against sin and the forth coming torment so that perhaps they could receive mercy
36|46|and whenever a revelation out of their Lord's revelations comes to them, they ignore it
36|47|When they are told to spend for the cause of God out of what He has provided for them for their sustenance, the disbelievers say to the believers, "Should we feed those whom God has decided to feed? You are in plain error
36|48|The unbelievers say, "When will the Day of Judgment come if what you say is at all true
36|49|They will not have to wait long. When the Day of Judgment comes, it will only take a single blast of sound to strike them while they are quarrelling with one another
36|50|Then they will not be able to make a will or return to their families
36|51|When the trumpet is sounded, they will be driven out of their grave into the presence of their Lord
36|52|They will say, "Woe to us! Who has raised us up from our graves? This is what the Beneficent God has promised. The Messengers have also spoke the truth
36|53|Only after a single blast of sound, they will all be brought into Our presence
36|54|No soul will be in the least bit wronged on that Day and no one will receive any recompense other than what he deserves for his deeds
36|55|The dwellers of Paradise on that day will enjoy themselves
36|56|They and their spouses will recline on couches in the shade therein
36|57|They will have fruits and whatever they desire
36|58|Peace be with you," will be a greeting for them from the Merciful Lord
36|59|(The Lord will command), "Criminals, stand away from the others on this day
36|60|Children of Adam, did We not command you not to worship satan. He was your sworn enemy
36|61|Did We not command you to worship Me and tell you that this is the straight path
36|62|Satan misled a great multitude of you. Did you not have any understanding
36|63|This is hell with which you were threatened
36|64|Suffer therein on this day for your disbelief
36|65|We shall seal your mouths on that Day, let your hands speak to us and your feet testify to what you had achieved
36|66|We could have blinded them had We wanted. Then they would have raced along to cross the Bridge but how could they have seen (their way)
36|67|We could have turned them into other creatures on the spot had We wanted and they would not have been able to precede or turn back
36|68|The physical growth of those whom We grant a long life will be reversed. Will you then not understand
36|69|We did not teach him (Muhammad) poetry, nor was he supposed to be a poet. It is only the word (of God) and the illustrious Quran
36|70|by which he may warn those who are living and may let the words of God come true against the unbelievers
36|71|Have they not seen what We have created from the labor of Our own hands? We have given them cattle
36|72|We have made the cattle subservient to them so they ride and consume them
36|73|From cattle they get milk and other benefits. Will they not then give thanks
36|74|They chose idols besides God in the hope of receiving help from them, but they will not be able to help them
36|75|Instead, the disbelievers will be brought into the presence of God as the soldiers of the idols
36|76|Muhammad, let not their words annoy you. We certainly know whatever they conceal or reveal
36|77|Has the human being not considered that We have created him from a drop of fluid. He is openly quarrelsome
36|78|He questions Our Resurrection of him, but has forgotten his own creation. He has said, "Who will give life to the bones which have become ashes
36|79|(Muhammad), tell him, "He who gave them life in the first place will bring them back to life again. He has the best knowledge of all creatures
36|80|He has created fire for you out of the green tree from which you can kindle other fires
36|81|Is the One who has created the heavens and the earth not able to create another creature like the human being? He certainly has the power to do so. He is the Supreme Creator and is All-knowing
36|82|Whenever He decides to create something He has only to say, "Exist," and it comes into existence
36|83|All glory belongs to the One in whose hands is the control of all things. To Him you will all return
37|1|I swear by (the angels) who stand in ranks
37|2|by those who drive away the devil (to protect Our revelation)
37|3|and those who recite Our revelations
37|4|that your Lord is the only Lord
37|5|He is the Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, the Lord of the Eastern regions
37|6|We have decked the lower heavens with stars
37|7|to protect them from the rebellious satan
37|8|The devils cannot hear those high above. They would be struck from all sides
37|9|and driven away to suffer the necessary torment
37|10|Some of them who stealthily steal words from the heavens are pursued by a glistening flame
37|11|(Muhammad), ask them, "Have they (people) been created stronger than what We have created?" We have created them from moist clay
37|12|(Muhammad), you will be surprised that they still mock (God's revelations)
37|13|They pay no attention when they are reminded
37|14|and when they see a miracle, they mock
37|15|it and say, "It is only plain magic
37|16|They say, "Shall we be brought to life again after we die and turn into dust and bones
37|17|Will our forefathers also be brought to life again
37|18|Say, "You will certainly be brought back to life in disgrace
37|19|The Day of Judgment will come within a single roar and they will remain gazing at it
37|20|They will say, "Woe to us!" (They will be told), "This is the day of receiving recompense
37|21|This is the Day of Judgment in which you disbelieved
37|22|(God will command the angels), "Gather together the unjust, their spouses, and what they had worshipped
37|23|besides God, and show them the way of hell
37|24|Stop them. They must be questioned
37|25|They will be asked, "Why do you not help each other
37|26|In fact, on that day they will be submissive
37|27|They will turn to each other saying
37|28|It was you who tried to mislead us from righteousness
37|29|Others will respond, "It was you who did not want to have any faith
37|30|We had no authority over you, in fact, you were a rebellious people
37|31|Thus, the words of Our Lord about us have come true and now we are suffering the torment
37|32|We mislead you and we ourselves had also gone astray
37|33|On that day they will all share the torment
37|34|This is how We deal with the criminals
37|35|They were the ones, who on being told, "God is only One," become puffed-up with pride
37|36|and said, "Should we give up our idols for the sake of an insane poet
37|37|In fact, he had brought them the truth and had acknowledged the Messengers (who were sent before him)
37|38|(They will be told), "You will certainly suffer the painful torment
37|39|and will be recompensed only for what you deserve
37|40|But the sincere servants of God
37|41|will have their determined sustenance
37|42|and fruits while they are honored
37|43|(They will live) in the bountiful gardens
37|44|on couches facing each other
37|45|They will be served with a cup full of crystal clear wine
37|46|delicious to those who drink it
37|47|but not harmful or intoxicating
37|48|They will have with them loving wives with big black and white eyes
37|49|who are as chaste as sheltered eggs
37|50|They will turn to each other and ask questions
37|51|One of them will say, "I had a companion who asked me
37|52|Do you believe in the Day of Judgment
37|53|Shall we be recompensed for our deeds after we die and become bones and dust
37|54|Do you want to see him
37|55|He will look down and see him in hell
37|56|He will say to his friend in hell, "By God, you almost destroyed me
37|57|Had I not the guidance of my Lord, I would certainly have been brought into torment
37|58|He will ask his companion, "Did you not say that there would only be one death
37|59|and that we would not be punished
37|60|This is certainly the greatest triumph
37|61|for which one must strive hard
37|62|Is this not a better reward than the tree of Zaqqum
37|63|which We have made as a torment for the unjust
37|64|(Zaqqum) is a tree which grows from the deepest part of hell
37|65|and its fruits are like the heads of devils
37|66|The dwellers of hell will eat that fruit and fill-up their bellies
37|67|Then they will have on top of it a mixture of boiling water
37|68|They can only return to hell
37|69|They found their father going astray
37|70|and rushed to follow them
37|71|Most of the ancient people had also gone astray
37|72|We had certainly sent warners to them
37|73|See how terrible was the end of those who were warned
37|74|Only Our sincere servants were saved
37|75|Noah called for help. How blessed was the answer which he received
37|76|We rescued him and his people from the greatest affliction
37|77|and We made his offspring the only survivors
37|78|We perpetuated his praise in later generations
37|79|Peace be with Noah among all men in the worlds
37|80|Thus do We reward the righteous ones
37|81|He was one of Our believing servants
37|82|We drowned all the others (besides Noah and his people)
37|83|Abraham was one of his followers
37|84|He turned to his Lord with a sound heart
37|85|and asked his father and his people, "What is that you worship
37|86|Do you want to worship false idols as your lords besides God
37|87|What do you think about the Lord of the Universe
37|88|(The people invited him to attend their feast). Then he looked at the stars
37|89|and said, "I am sick
37|90|All the people turned away from him
37|91|and he turned to their idols and asked them, "Do you eat
37|92|Why do you not speak
37|93|He struck them with his right hand
37|94|Thereupon the people came running to him
37|95|He said, "How can you worship what you yourselves have carved
37|96|even though God created both you and that which you have made
37|97|They said, "Let us build a fire and throw him into the flames
37|98|They plotted against him, but We brought humiliation upon them
37|99|(Abraham) said, "I will go to my Lord who will guide me
37|100|Abraham prayed, "Lord, grant me a righteous son
37|101|We gave him the glad news of the birth of a forbearing son
37|102|When his son was old enough to work with him, he said, "My son, I have had a dream that I must sacrifice you. What do you think of this?" He replied, "Father, fulfill whatever you are commanded to do and you will find me patient, by the will of God
37|103|When they both agreed and Abraham had lain down his son on the side of his face (for slaughtering)
37|104|We called to him, "Abraham
37|105|you have fulfilled what you were commanded to do in your dream." Thus do We reward the righteous ones
37|106|It was certainly an open trial
37|107|We ransomed his son with a great sacrifice
37|108|and perpetuated his praise in later generations
37|109|Peace be with Abraham
37|110|Thus, do We reward the righteous ones
37|111|He was one of Our believing servants
37|112|We gave him the glad news of the birth of Isaac, one of the righteous Prophets
37|113|We had blessed him and Isaac. Some of their offspring were righteous and others were openly unjust to themselves
37|114|We certainly bestowed Our favor upon Moses and Aaron
37|115|and saved them and their people from great distress
37|116|We helped them and they were victorious
37|117|We gave them the enlightening Book
37|118|guided them to the right path
37|119|and perpetuated their praise in later generations
37|120|Peace be with Moses and Aaron
37|121|Thus do We reward the righteous ones
37|122|They were two of Our believing servants
37|123|Elias was certainly a Messenger
37|124|He told his people, "Why do you not have fear of God
37|125|Do you worship Ba`al and abandon the Best Creator
37|126|who is your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers
37|127|They called him a liar. Thus, all of them will suffer torment
37|128|except the sincere servants of God
37|129|We perpetuated his praise in the later generations
37|130|Peace be with the followers of Elias
37|131|In this way do We reward the righteous ones
37|132|He was one of Our believing servants
37|133|Lot was certainly a Messenger
37|134|We rescued him and his whole family
37|135|except for an old woman who remained behind
37|136|Then We totally destroyed the others
37|137|You pass by (their ruined town) in the morning and at night
37|138|Will you then not understand
37|139|Jonah was certainly a Messenger
37|140|He abandoned his people
37|141|and sailed away in a laden ship, wherein people cast lots. Because he lost, he was thrown into the water
37|142|The fish swallowed him up and he deserved (all this)
37|143|Had he not glorified God
37|144|he would certainly have remained inside the fish until the Day of Resurrection
37|145|We cast him out of the fish unto dry land and he was sick
37|146|We made a plant of gourd grow up for him
37|147|We sent him to a hundred thousand or more people
37|148|They believed in him so We granted them enjoyment for an appointed time
37|149|(Muhammad), ask them, "Do daughters belong to your Lord and sons to them
37|150|Have We created the angels as females before their very eyes
37|151|It is only because of their false invention that they say
37|152|God has begotten a son.' They are certainly liars
37|153|Has He chosen daughters in preference to sons
37|154|Woe to you! How terrible is your Judgment
37|155|Do you not understand
37|156|Do you have clear authority
37|157|Bring your book if what you say is true
37|158|They have said that there is a relationship between Him and the jinn. The jinn certainly know that they will all be brought to suffer torment
37|159|God is too glorious to be described as they describe Him
37|160|except the servants of God, sincere and devoted
37|161|You and whatever you worship
37|162|cannot mislead anyone
37|163|except those who are doomed to enter hell
37|164|The angels say, "Each of us has an appointed place
37|165|We stand in ranks (for prayer)
37|166|and we glorify God
37|167|Even though they (unbelievers) say
37|168|Had we received guidance from the people living before us
37|169|we would have certainly been sincere servants of God
37|170|They have rejected the Quran. They will soon know the consequences (of their disbelief)
37|171|We decreed that Our Messenger servants
37|172|will certainly be victorious
37|173|and that Our army will be triumphant
37|174|(Muhammad), stay away from them for a while
37|175|and watch them. They, too, will watch
37|176|Do they want to suffer Our torment immediately
37|177|When it descends into their courtyard, it will be terrible for those who have already been warned
37|178|Stay away from them for a while
37|179|and watch. They, too, will watch
37|180|Your Lord, the Lord of Honor, is too exalted to be considered as they describe Him
37|181|Peace be with the Messengers (of God)
37|182|It is only God, the Lord of the Universe, who deserves all praise
38|1|Sad. I swear by the Quran, which is full of reminders of God, (that you are a Messenger)
38|2|In fact, the unbelievers are the ones who are boastful and quarrelsome
38|3|How many ancient generations did We destroy? (On facing Our torment) they cried out for help, but it was too late for them to escape
38|4|It seems strange to the pagans that a man from their own people should come to them as a Prophet. The unbelievers have said, "He is only a lying magician
38|5|They say, "Has he condemned all other gods but One? This is certainly strange
38|6|A group of the pagans walked out of a meeting with the Prophet and told the others, "Let us walk away. Be steadfast in the worship of your gods. This man wants to dominate you
38|7|We have heard nothing like this in the latest religion. This is only his own false invention
38|8|Can it be that he alone has received the Quran?" In fact, they have doubts about My Quran and this is because they have not yet faced (My) torment
38|9|Do they possess the treasures of the mercy of your, (Muhammad's), Lord, the Majestic and Munificent God
38|10|Do they own the heavens and the earth and all that is between them? Let them try on their own to block (the ways of heavens so that Our revelations cannot come to you)
38|11|They are only a small band among the defeated confederate tribes
38|12|The people of Noah, Ad and the dominating Pharaoh had rejected Our revelations
38|13|So also did the people of Thamud, Lot, and the dwellers of the Forest
38|14|Each of them who rejected the Messenger become subject to Our punishment
38|15|They had only to wait for the single inevitable blast
38|16|They scornfully said, "Lord, show us the record of our deeds before the day when everyone must present the account of their deeds
38|17|(Muhammad), bear patiently what they say and recall Our servant, David, who had strong hands and who was most repentant
38|18|We made the mountains join him in glorifying Us in the evening and in the morning
38|19|We made the birds assemble around him in flocks
38|20|We strengthened his kingdom, giving him wisdom and the power of sound Judgment
38|21|Have you heard the news of the disputing parties who climbed the walls of the prayer room
38|22|and entered where David was (praying). He was frightened, so they said, "Do not be afraid. We are only two disputing parties of which one of us has transgressed against the other. Judge between us with truth and justice and guide us to the right path
38|23|One of them said, "This is my brother who has ninety-nine ewes when I have only one. He has demanded me to place that one in his custody; he had the stronger argument
38|24|David said, "He has certainly been unjust in demanding your ewe from you. Most partners transgress against each other except for the righteously striving believers who are very few." David realized that it was a test from Us so he asked forgiveness from his Lord and knelt down before him in repentance
38|25|We forgave him for this. In Our eyes he certainly has a good position and the best share (of the world to come)
38|26|We told him. "David, We have appointed you as Our deputy on earth so judge among the people with truth. Do not follow (worldly) desires lest you go astray from the way of God. Those who go astray from the way of God will suffer severe torment for forgetting the Day of Reckoning
38|27|We have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them without purpose, even though this is the belief of the disbelievers. Woe to the disbelievers; they will suffer the torment of fire
38|28|Do We consider the righteously striving believers equal to the evil-doers in the land? Are the pious ones equal to those who openly commit sin
38|29|It is a blessed Book which We have revealed for you so that you will reflect upon its verses and so the people of understanding will take heed
38|30|We granted Solomon to David, a blessed servant of Ours and certainly the most repentant person
38|31|When the noble galloping horses were displayed to him one evening
38|32|he said, "My love of horses for the cause of God has made me continue watching them until sunset, thus making me miss my prayer
38|33|He said, "Bring them back to me." Then he started to rub their legs and necks
38|34|We tested Solomon by (causing death to his son) and leaving his body on Solomon's chair. Then he turned to Us in repentance
38|35|saying, "Lord, forgive me and grant me a kingdom that no one after me can have the like. You are All-munificent
38|36|We made the wind subservient to him, to blow gently wherever he desired at his command
38|37|and all the devils who built and dived for him
38|38|The rest of the devils were bound in chains
38|39|We told him, "This is Our gift to you so give them away free or keep them as you like
38|40|In Our eyes he certainly has a high position and the best place to return
38|41|(Muhammad), recall Our servant Job. When he prayed to his Lord saying, "Satan has afflicted me with hardship and torment
38|42|(We answered his prayer, healed his sickness, and told him), "Run on your feet. This is cool water (for you) to wash and drink
38|43|We gave him back his family and doubled their number as a blessing from Us and as a reminder to the people of understanding
38|44|We told him, "Take a handful of straw. Strike your wife with it to fulfill your oath." We found him to be patient. What an excellent servant he was. He was certainly most repenting
38|45|(Muhammad), recall Our servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, all of whom possessed virtuous hands and clear visions
38|46|We gave them this pure distinction because of their continual remembrance of the Day of Judgment
38|47|In Our eyes they were of the chosen, virtuous people
38|48|Recall Ismael, Elisha, and Dhulkifl (Ezekiel) who were all virtuous people
38|49|Such is their noble story. The pious ones will certainly have the best place to return
38|50|They will enter gardens of Eden with their gates open for them
38|51|They will be resting therein and will be able to ask for many kinds of fruit and drink
38|52|They will have bashful wives of equal age with them
38|53|This is what they had been promised for the Day of Judgment
38|54|Our provision (for you) will never be exhausted
38|55|However, the rebellious ones will have the worst place to return
38|56|They will suffer in hell. What a terrible dwelling
38|57|(They will be told), "This is your recompense
38|58|Taste the scalding water, pus, and other putrid things
38|59|Their leaders will be told, "This band will also be thrown headlong with you into hell." Their leaders will exclaim, "May condemnation fall upon them! Let them suffer the torment of fire
38|60|Their followers will say, "In fact, it is you who deserve condemnation. It was you who led us to hell, a terrible dwelling
38|61|They will continue saying, "Lord, double the torment of fire for those who led us into this
38|62|But why is it that we cannot see men whom we had considered as wicked
38|63|and whom we mocked? Have they been rescued or can our eyes not find them
38|64|Such disputes will certainly take place among the dwellers of hell fire
38|65|(Muhammad) say, "I am only a warner. The only Lord is God, the Almighty
38|66|He is the Lord of the heavens, the earth, and all that is between them, the Majestic and All-forgiving
38|67|Say, "It (facts about the supremacy of God) is the greatest message
38|68|but you have turned away from it
38|69|I have no knowledge of the dispute among the angels (concerning their attitude towards Adam)
38|70|I have only received revelation to give you plain warning
38|71|When your Lord told the angels, "I will create a mortal out of clay
38|72|and when I give it proper shape and blow My spirit into it, bow down in prostration to him
38|73|all the angel then prostrated themselves
38|74|except Iblis who puffed himself up with pride and became a disbeliever
38|75|The Lord said, "Iblis, what prevented you from prostrating before what I have created with My own hands? Was it because of your pride or are you truly exalted
38|76|He said, "I am better than him. You have created me from fire and him out of clay
38|77|The Lord said, "Get out of here. You deserve to be stoned
38|78|My condemnation will be with you until the Day of Judgment
38|79|He said, "Lord, grant me respite until the Day of Resurrection
38|80|The Lord said, "You will only be given a respite
38|81|for an appointed time
38|82|He said, "By Your Glory, I shall seduce all of them (children of Adam)
38|83|except Your sincere servants among them
38|84|The Lord said, "I swear by the Truth - and I speak the Truth
38|85|that I shall certainly fill hell with you and your followers all together
38|86|(Muhammad), say, "I do not ask any reward for my preaching to you for I am not a pretender
38|87|It, (the Quran), is nothing but a reminder to you from the Lord of the Universe
38|88|You will certainly know its truthfulness after a certain time
39|1|This Book is a revelation from God, the Majestic and All-Wise
39|2|We have revealed the Book to you in all truth. Worship God and be devoted to His religion
39|3|The religion of God is certainly pure. Concerning those whom they consider as their guardians besides God, they say, "We only worship them so that they may make our positions nearer to God." God will certainly issue His decree about their differences. God does not guide the liars and the disbelievers
39|4|Had God wanted to have a son, He would have chosen one from His creatures according to His will. God is too Exalted to have a son. He is One and Almighty
39|5|He has created the heavens and the earth for a genuine purpose. He covers the night with the day and the day with the night and has subdued the sun and the moon, each of which floats for an appointed time. God is certainly Majestic and All-Forgiving
39|6|He has created you from a single soul. Out of this He created your spouse. He sent you eight pairs of cattle. He creates you for a second time in the wombs of your mothers behind three curtains of darkness. He is your Lord to whom belongs the Kingdom. He is the only Lord. Where then will you turn away
39|7|If you disbelieve, know that God is certainly independent of you. He does not want disbelief for His servants. If you give thanks, He will accept it from you. No one will be responsible for the sins of others. To your Lord you will all return and He will tell you about what you have done. He knows best what the hearts contain
39|8|When the human being is afflicted with hardship, he starts to pray to his Lord and turns to Him in repentance. When God grants him a favor, he forgets the hardship about which he had prayed to God and starts to consider equal to God things that lead him astray from His path. (Muhammad), tell him, "You can only enjoy in your disbelief for a short time. You will certainly be a dweller of hell fire
39|9|Can this one be considered equal to one who worships God during the night, prostrating and standing, who has fear of the Day of Judgment, and who has hope in the mercy of his Lord? Say, "Are those who know equal to those who do not know? Only the people of reason take heed
39|10|Say to My believing servants, "Have fear of your Lord. Those who act righteously in this life will receive good reward. The land of God is vast. God will recompense the deeds of those who have exercised patience, without keeping an account
39|11|Say, "I am commanded to worship God and be devoted to His religion
39|12|and I am commanded to be the first Muslim
39|13|Say, "I am afraid that for disobeying my Lord I shall suffer the torment of the great day
39|14|Say, "I worship God alone and devote myself to His religion
39|15|Worship besides Him whatever you want. The greatest losers are those whose souls and family members will be lost on the Day of Judgment for this is certainly a great loss
39|16|Above and below them their will be shadows of fire. This is how God frightens His servants. My servants have fear of Me
39|17|Those who have avoided worshipping idols and have turned in repentance to God will receive the glad news
39|18|(Muhammad), give the glad news to those of Our servants who listen to the words and only follow the best ones. Tell them that they are those whom God has guided. They are the people of understanding
39|19|How can you rescue the one who is destined to suffer the torment
39|20|Those who have fear of their Lord will have lofty mansions built upon mansions beneath which streams flow. It is the promise of God. God does not disregard His promise
39|21|Have you not seen that God has sent down water from the sky and made it flow as springs out of the earth? He makes crops of different colors grow with this water and flourish, which then turn yellow and wither away. In this there is a reminder for the people of understanding
39|22|One whose chest (heart and mind) is left open for Islam (submission to His will) shall receive light from God. Woe to those whose hearts have become like stone against the remembrance of God. They are clearly in error
39|23|God has revealed the best reading material in the form of a Book with similar passages which refer to each other and make the skins of those who fear their Lord shiver. Then their skins and hearts incline to the remembrance of God. This is the guidance of God. He guides whomever He wants. No one can guide those whom God has caused to go astray
39|24|Is there anyone who is afraid of the torment of the Day of Judgment when the unjust will be told, "Suffer the result of your deeds
39|25|Those who lived before them had also rejected Our revelations. Thus, the torment struck them and they did not even realize where it came from
39|26|God made them suffer humiliation in this life. Would that they knew that the torment for them in the next life will be even greater
39|27|We have given all kinds of examples for the human being in this Quran so that perhaps he may take heed
39|28|This Quran is a flawless reading text in the Arabic language. Perhaps they will have fear of God
39|29|God tells a parable in which there is a company of quarrelsome people and only one of them is well disciplined. Can they be considered as equal? It is only God who deserves all praise. In fact, most of them do not know
39|30|(Muhammad), you will die and all of them will also die
39|31|Then, on the Day of Judgment, all of you will present your disputes before your Lord
39|32|Who is more unjust then one who invents falsehood against God and rejects the truth after it has come to them. Is not hell a dwelling for the disbelievers
39|33|Those who have brought the truth and have acknowledged it are those who have fear of God
39|34|They will receive whatever they want from their Lord. Thus is the reward of the righteous ones
39|35|God will certainly expiate their bad deeds and reward them much more for what they have done
39|36|Is God not sufficient (support) for His servants? They frighten you with what they worship besides God. Who can guide one whom God has caused to go astray
39|37|Who can mislead one whom God has guided? Is God not Majestic and Revengeful
39|38|If you ask them, "Who has created the heavens and the earth?" They will certainly say, "God has created them." Ask them, "Do you think that you can rescue me from the punishment of God with which He may afflict me? Can you prevent His mercy if He wants to grant it to me?" Say, "God is Sufficient (support) for me. In Him alone one must trust
39|39|Say, "My people, act as you wish. I shall do as I like and you will soon know
39|40|who will face the humiliating torment and suffer everlasting retribution
39|41|(Muhammad), We have revealed the Book to you for mankind in all truth. Whoever seeks guidance does so for his own good. Whosoever goes astray goes against his own soul. You are not their representative
39|42|God will receive their souls when they die. Their souls do not die when they are sleeping. During people's sleep He withholds those souls which He has decreed to die and releases the others for an appointed time. In this there is evidence (of the Truth) for the thoughtful people
39|43|Have they chosen intercessors besides God? Say, "Would you choose them as your intercessors even though they do not possess anything and have no understanding
39|44|Say, "Intercession belongs to God. To Him belongs the heavens and the earth and to Him you will all return
39|45|When one God is mentioned, the hearts of those who do not believe in the Day of Judgment begin to shrink, but when the idols are mentioned, they rejoice
39|46|Say, "Lord, the Creator of the heavens and the earth, knower of the seen and unseen, it is You who will issue Your decree about the differences of Your servants
39|47|Had the unjust possessed double the amount of the wealth of the whole earth, they would certainly have liked to offer it on the Day of Resurrection as redemption from the torment of Our scourge when God would make public what they had never expected
39|48|Their bad deeds will become public and they will be surrounded by the torment which they had mocked during their worldly life
39|49|When the human being is afflicted with hardship, he cries out to us for help. When We grant him a favor, he says, "I knew that I deserved it." In fact, it is only a test for him, but most people do not know this
39|50|People who lived before them had also said, "Our wealth has been earned by our own merits." What they had earned was of no benefit to them
39|51|They were afflicted by the terrible result of whatever they gained. Besides this affliction, the unjust among them will also suffer the consequence of their deeds. They will not be able to challenge God
39|52|Did they not know that God determines and increases the sustenance of whomever He wants. In this there is evidence (of the truth) for the believing people
39|53|(Muhammad), tell my servants who have committed injustice to themselves, "Do not despair of the mercy of God. God certainly forgives all sins. He is All-forgiving and All-merciful
39|54|Turn in repentance to your Lord and submit to His will before you are afflicted with the torment after which you can receive no help
39|55|Follow the best of what is revealed to you from your Lord before the torment suddenly approaches you and you will not realize how it came about
39|56|Turn to God in repentance before a soul says, "Woe to me because of my failure to fulfill my duties to God. Woe to me for mocking God's guidance
39|57|Or before the soul says, "Had God guided me, I could have been a pious man
39|58|Or, on seeing the torment, it would say, "Would I have the opportunity, this time I would certainly become a pious person
39|59|God will reply to the soul, "My revelations had certainly come to you but you rejected them. You were puffed-up with pride and you became an unbeliever
39|60|On the Day of Judgment you will see the faces of those who had invented falsehood against God blackened. Is not hell the dwelling of the arrogant ones
39|61|God will save the pious ones because of their virtuous deeds. No hardship will touch them nor will they be grieved
39|62|God is the Creator and Guardian of all things
39|63|In His hands are the keys of the treasuries of the heavens and the earth. Those who reject God's revelations will be lost
39|64|(Muhammad), say, "Ignorant ones, do you command me to worship things other than God
39|65|even though God has said, "It has been revealed to you and to those who lived before you that if you consider other things equal to God, your deeds will be made devoid of all virtue and you will certainly be lost
39|66|(Muhammad), You must worship God alone and give Him thanks
39|67|They have not paid due respect to God. The whole earth will be gripped in His hands on the Day of Judgment and the heavens will be just like a scroll in His right hand. God is too Glorious and High to be considered equal to their idols
39|68|Everyone in the heavens and the earth will faint in terror except for those whom God will save when the trumpet is sounded. They will all stand up and wait when the trumpet sounds for the second time
39|69|The earth will become bright from the light of your Lord. The Book of Records will be presented and the Prophets and witness will be summoned. All will be judged with justice and no wrong will be done to anyone
39|70|Every soul will be recompensed for its deeds. God knows best whatever they have done
39|71|The disbelievers will be driven to hell in hordes. Its gates will be opened when they are brought nearby and the keepers will ask them, "Did Messengers from your own people not come to you to recite your Lord's revelations and to warn you about this day?" They will reply, "Yes, the Messengers did come to us, but the unbelievers were doomed to face the torment
39|72|They will be told, "Enter the gates of hell to live therein forever. What a terrible dwelling for the arrogant ones
39|73|The pious ones will be led to Paradise in large groups. Its gates will be opened to them when they are brought nearby and its keepers will say, "Welcome! Peace be with you. Enter the gates of Paradise to live therein forever
39|74|They will say, "It is only God who deserves all praise. He has made His promise come true and has given the earth as an inheritance to us. Now we live in the gardens as we wished. Blessed is the reward of those who labor
39|75|(Muhammad), on that day you will see the angels circling around the Throne, glorifying and praising their Lord. Judgment with justice will be decreed between the people of Paradise and hell and it will be said, "It is only God, Lord of the Universe who deserves all praise
40|1|Ha. Mim
40|2|This Book is a revelation from God, the Majestic and All-knowing
40|3|who forgives sins, who accepts repentance, whose punishment is severe, and whose bounty is universal. He is the only Lord and to Him all things proceed
40|4|No one disputes the revelations of the Lord except the disbelievers. Let not their activities in the land deceive you
40|5|The people of Noah who lived before and the Confederate tribes who lived after them rejected Our revelations. Every nation schemed against its Messengers to seize them and disputed against them to defeat the truth. But torment struck them and how terrible was their retribution
40|6|The word of your Lord that the disbelievers will be the dwellers of hell fire has already been decreed
40|7|The bearers of the Throne glorify their Lord with His praise. They believe in Him and ask Him to forgive the believers. They say, "Our Lord, Your mercy and knowledge encompass all things. Forgive those who turn to You in repentance and follow Your path. Lord, save them from the torment of hell
40|8|Lord, admit them and their fathers, spouses, and offspring who have reformed themselves to the gardens of Eden which You have promised them. You are Majestic and All-wise
40|9|Lord, keep them away from evil deeds. Whomever You have saved from evil on the Day of Judgment has certainly been granted Your mercy and this is the greatest triumph
40|10|The disbelievers will be told, "God's hatred towards you is much greater than your hatred of your own selves. You were called to the faith but you disbelieved
40|11|They say, "Lord, You have caused us to die twice and You have brought us back to life twice. We have confessed our sins, so is there any way out of this (hell)
40|12|They will be answered, "Your suffering is only because you disbelieved when One God was mentioned. When other things were considered equal to Him, you believed in them. Judgment belongs to God, the Most High, the Most Great
40|13|It is He who has shown you the evidence of His existence and has sent you sustenance from the sky, yet only those who turn to God in repentance take heed
40|14|Worship God and be devoted to His religion even though the disbelievers dislike this
40|15|God is the promoter of His servants and the owner of the Throne. He sends His spirit by His command to whichever of His servants He wants to warn them of the Day of Judgment
40|16|Nothing will remain hidden from God concerning them on the day when they appear before God (from their graves) (It will be asked), "To whom does the kingdom belong on this Day?" (It will be answered), "The kingdom belongs to the Almighty One God
40|17|Every soul will be recompensed for its deeds on this Day. There will be no injustice. Certainly God's reckoning is swift
40|18|(Muhammad), warn them of the approaching day when because of hardship and frustration their hearts will almost reach up to their throats. The unjust will have no friends nor any intercessor who will be heard
40|19|God knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal
40|20|God judges with Truth but those whom they worship besides God can have no Judgment. God is certainly All-hearing and All-aware
40|21|Have they not travelled through the land to see the terrible end of those who lived before them. They had been mightier than them in power and in leaving their traces on earth. God punished them for their sins. They had no one to save them from God's torment
40|22|Messengers had come to them with illustrious miracles but they disbelieved and thus God struck them with His torment. He is Mighty and Severe in His retribution
40|23|We sent Moses with Our miracles and clear authority
40|24|to the Pharaoh, Haman, and Korah, who said, "He is only a lying magician
40|25|When We sent him to them for a genuine purpose, they said, "Kill the sons of those who have believed in him but keep their women alive." The plots of the unbelievers can only result in failure
40|26|The Pharaoh said, "Let me kill Moses and let him call for help from his Lord. I am afraid that he will change your religion or spread evil through the land
40|27|Moses said, "I seek protection from your and my Lord against every arrogant person who has no faith in the Day of Judgment
40|28|A believing person from the people of the Pharaoh who concealed his faith said, "Would you kill a man just because he says God is my Lord? He has brought you illustrious miracles from your Lord. If he speaks lies, it will only harm him, but if he speaks the Truth, some of his warnings may affect you. God does not guide a transgressing liar
40|29|My people, today you have the kingdom and the power on earth but who will help us against the wrath of God if it will befall us?" The Pharaoh said, "I show you only what I think is proper and guide you only to the right direction
40|30|The believing man said, "I am afraid that you will face a (terrible) day like that of the groups
40|31|people of Noah, Ad, Thamud, and those after them. God did not want injustice for His servants
40|32|My people, I am afraid for you on (the Day of Judgment), when people will cry for help
40|33|On that day you will run away, but no one will be able to protect you from (God's Judgment). No one can guide one whom God has caused to go astray
40|34|Joseph came to you before with illustrious evidence but you still have doubts about what he brought. When he passed away, you said, "God will never send any Messenger after him." Thus does God causes to go astray the skeptical transgressing people
40|35|those who dispute the revelations of God without having received clear authority. This act greatly angers God and the believers. Thus does God seal the hearts of every arrogant oppressor
40|36|Pharaoh said, "Haman, build a tower of baked bricks for me so that I shall have access
40|37|to the heavens and be able to climb up to the Lord of Moses. I think that Moses is lying." Thus, Pharaoh's evil deeds seemed attractive to him and prevented him from the right path. The Pharaoh's plots only led him to his own destructor
40|38|The believing man said, "My people, follow me and I shall show you the right guidance
40|39|My people, this worldly life is only the means (to an end), but the life hereafter will be the everlasting abode
40|40|Whoever commits evil deeds will be recompensed to the same degree. The righteously striving believer, male or female, will enter Paradise wherein they will receive their sustenance without any account being kept
40|41|My people, "How strange is it that I invite you to salvation when you invite me to the fire
40|42|You call me to disbelieve in God and to believe other things equal to Him about which I have no knowledge. I call you to the Majestic and All-forgiving One
40|43|The idols to which you invite me certainly have no claim to be deities in this world or in the life to come. Our return is to God and the transgressors will be the dwellers of hell fire
40|44|You will soon recall what I have told you. I entrust God with my affairs. God is Well Aware of His servants
40|45|God protected him against their evil plans and the people of the Pharaoh were struck by the most horrible torment
40|46|They will be exposed to the fire in the mornings and the evenings and on the Day of Judgment, they will be told, "People of the Pharaoh, suffer the most severe torment
40|47|During a dispute in the fire, the suppressed ones will say to those who had dominated them, "We were your followers. Can you now relieve us of our suffering in the fire
40|48|The ones who had dominated them will say, "All of us are now in hell. God has already issued His Judgment of His servants (and no one can change this)
40|49|The dwellers of hell fire will ask its keepers, "Pray to your Lord to relieve us from the torment at least for one day
40|50|The keepers will ask them, "Did your Messengers not come to you with illustrious evidence (of the Truth)? They will reply, "Yes, they did." The keepers will then say, "You may pray but the prayer of the disbelievers will not be answered
40|51|We shall help Our Messengers and the believers, in this life and on the day when witness will come forward
40|52|The excuses of the unjust will be of no benefit to them on that day. They will be condemned to live in a most terrible abode
40|53|To Moses We had given guidance and to the children of Israel We had given the Book
40|54|as their inheritance and as a guide and a reminder to the people of understanding
40|55|(Muhammad), exercise patience. The promise of God is true. Seek forgiveness for your sins and glorify your Lord with His praise in the evenings and in the early mornings
40|56|Those who dispute the revelations of God without having received any authority do so because of their arrogance, but their arrogance cannot bring them any success. Seek protection from God for He is All-hearing and All-aware
40|57|The creation of the heavens and the earth is certainly greater than the creation of mankind, but most people do not know
40|58|Just as the blind and the seeing are not equal, so are the righteously striving believers and the sinners are not equal. How little to this you pay attention
40|59|The Hour of Doom will inevitably come, but most people do not have faith
40|60|Your Lord has said, "Pray to Me for I shall answer you prayers. Those who are too proud to worship Me will soon go to hell in disgrace
40|61|It is God Who has made the night for you to rest and the day for you to see. God is Benevolent to the human being, but most people do not give Him due thanks
40|62|It is God, your Lord, Who has created all things. He is the only Lord. Why then do you turn away from His worship to the worshipping of idols
40|63|Thus are indeed those who have rejected the revelations of God
40|64|It is God who has created the earth as a place for you to live and the sky as a dome above you. He has shaped you in the best form and has provided you with pure sustenance. This is God, your Lord. Blessed is God, the Lord of the Universe
40|65|He is the Everlasting and the only Lord. So worship Him and be devoted to His religion. It is only God, the Lord of the Universe who deserves all praise
40|66|(Muhammad), say, "I have been forbidden to worship whatever you worship besides God after receiving clear evidence from my Lord. I have been commanded to submit myself to the will of the Lord of the Universe
40|67|It is He Who created you from clay, turning it into a living germ, then into a clot of blood, and then brings you forth as a child. He then made you grow into manhood and become old. He causes some of you to live for the appointed time and some of you to die before so that perhaps you may have understanding
40|68|It is He Who gives life and causes things to die. When He decides to do something, He only says, "Exist," and it comes into existence
40|69|Have you not seen how those who dispute the revelations of God, turn away from Truth to falsehood
40|70|Those who rejected the Book and the message which was given to Our Messenger will soon know (the consequences of their evil deeds)
40|71|when fetters will be placed around their necks and chains will drag them
40|72|into boiling water and then they will be burned in the fire
40|73|Then they will be asked, "Where are the idols which you worshipped besides God
40|74|They will reply, "They have abandoned us. In fact, we had worshipped nothing" Thus does God cause the disbelievers to go astray
40|75|They will be told, "This (torment) is the result of your unreasonable happiness on the earth and of your propagation of falsehood
40|76|Enter the gates of hell to live therein forever. How terrible is the dwelling of the arrogant ones
40|77|(Muhammad), exercise patience. The promise of God is true. Whether We let you witness the suffering with which they were threatened or because of your death (you do not see them suffering,), We shall still punish them when they return to Us (on the Day of Judgment)
40|78|We have told you the stories of some of Our Messengers whom We had sent before you and We have not told you the stories of some others. A Messenger is not supposed to show a miracle without the permission of God. When God's decree of punishment comes to pass, He will judge truthfully and the supporters of the falsehood will perish when God's decree of punishemnt comes to pass
40|79|It is God Who has created cattle for you to ride and to consume as food
40|80|You may also obtain other benefits from them. You may ride them to seek whatever you need or be carried by them as ships carry you by sea
40|81|God shows you the evidence (of His existence). How can you then deny such evidence
40|82|Have they not travelled through the land to see the terrible end of those who lived before them? They were far mightier in both number and power and in what they had established. Their (worldly) gains were of no benefit to them
40|83|They were far too content with their own knowledge (to pay attention to the Messengers) when Our Messengers came to them with illustrious evidence. They were encompassed by the torment for mocking Our guidance
40|84|They said, "We believe in One God and disbelieve in whatever we had considered equal to Him," when they experienced Our wrath
40|85|Their faith proved to be of no benefit to them when they became subject to Our torment. Such was God's prevailing tradition among His servants in the past. Thus were the unbelievers destroyed
41|1|Ha. Mim
41|2|This is the revelations from the Beneficent, Merciful God
41|3|The verses of this Book have been fully expounded. It is a reading in the Arabic language for the people of knowledge
41|4|It contains glad news and warnings (for the people), but most of them have ignored it and do not listen
41|5|They say, "Our hearts are covered against and our ears are deaf to whatever you (Muhammad) invite us to. There is a barrier between us and you. So act as you please and we shall act as we please
41|6|(Muhammad), say, "I am a mere mortal like you. I have received a revelation that your Lord is the only One. So be up-right and obedient to Him and seek forgiveness from Him
41|7|Woe to the pagans, who do not pay zakat and have no faith in the life to come
41|8|The righteously striving believers will have a never-ending reward
41|9|Say, "Do you really disbelieve in the One Who created the earth in two days? Do you consider things equal to Him? He is the Lord of the Universe
41|10|In four days He placed the mountains on it, blessed it, and equally measured out sustenance for those who seek sustenance
41|11|He established His dominance over the sky, which (for that time) was like smoke. Then He told the heavens and the earth, "Take your shape either willingly or by force" They said, "We willingly obey
41|12|He formed the seven heavens in two days and revealed to each one its task. He decked the sky above the earth with torches and protected it from (intruders).. Such is the design of the Majestic and All-knowing God
41|13|If they ignore (your message), tell them, "I have warned you against a destructive blast of sound like that which struck the people of `Ad and Thamud
41|14|When Messengers from all sides came to them saying, "Do not worship anything besides God, " they said, "Had our Lord wanted, He would have sent us angelic Messengers. We do not believe in your message
41|15|The people of Ad unjustly sought dominance on earth saying, "Who is more powerful than us?" Did they not consider that God created them and that He is more powerful than they were?" They rejected Our revelations
41|16|We sent upon them a violent wind during a few ill-fated days to make them suffer a disgraceful torment in this life. Their torment in the life to come will be even more disgraceful and they will not receive any help
41|17|We sent guidance to the people of Thamud but they preferred blindness to guidance so a humiliating blast of torment struck them for their evil deeds
41|18|We only rescued the believers who had fear of God
41|19|They will be spurred on
41|20|until (on the brink of it) their eyes, ears and skin will testify to their deeds on the Day when the enemies of God are driven to the fire
41|21|They will ask their own skin, "Why did you testify against us?" They will reply, "God, who has made everything speak, made us also speak. It was He Who created you in the first place and to Him you have returned
41|22|You did not (think) to hide your deeds from your ears, eyes and skin and you felt that God would not know all that you had been doing
41|23|This was how you considered your Lord, but He knows you better than you know yourselves. Thus, you are now lost
41|24|Even if they were to exercise patience, their dwelling would still be hell fire. Even if they were to seek favors, they would receive none
41|25|We assigned for them companions who would make their past and present (deeds) seem attractive to them. Thus, they became subject to what the jinn and human beings before were destined to suffer. They were certainly lost
41|26|The disbelievers say, "Do not listen to this Quran but make a lot of unnecessary noise while it is being read so that perhaps you will defeat it
41|27|We shall certainly make the unbelievers suffer severe torment and will punish them far worse than what they deserve for their deeds
41|28|The recompense of the enemies of God for their rejection of Our revelations will be fire as their eternal dwelling
41|29|The disbelievers will say, "Lord, show us the human beings and jinn who caused us to go astray. We shall put them under our feet to lower them
41|30|To those who have said, "God is our Lord, " and who have remained steadfast to their belief, the angels will descend saying, "Do not be afraid or grieved. Receive the glad news of the Paradise which was promised to you
41|31|We are your guardians in this world and in the life to come, where you will have whatever you call for
41|32|a hospitable welcome from the All-forgiving and All-merciful God
41|33|Who speaks better than one who invites human beings to God, acts righteously and says, "I am a Muslim
41|34|Virtue and evil are not equal. If you replace evil habits by virtuous ones, you will certainly find that your enemies will become your intimate friends
41|35|Only those who exercise patience and who have been granted a great share of God's favor can find such an opportunity
41|36|(Muhammad), seek God's protection if satan's temptation grieves you, for God is All-hearing and All-knowing
41|37|(Some evidence of His existence) are the night, day, sun, and moon. Do not prostrate before the sun and the moon, but prostrate before God Who has created them if you want to worship Him alone
41|38|However, if people are too proud to prostrate before God, let them know that God's other creatures glorify Him both day and night without fatigue
41|39|Further evidence is that (at times) you find the earth to be barren. When it is watered it moves and swells (to let the plants grow). The One who brings it back to life will also bring the dead back to life. He has power over all things
41|40|Those who deviate from Our revelations are not hidden from Us. Is the one who will be thrown into hell fire better than the one who will be brought safely into the presence of God on the Day of Judgment? Act as you wish; God is Well-Aware of whatever you do
41|41|The disbelievers (do not know) that the Quran which was sent to them is certainly a glorious Book
41|42|Falsehood can not reach it from any direction. It is the revelation from the All-wise, Praiseworthy One
41|43|Nothing has been said to you which was not said to the Messengers who lived before you. Your Lord is certainly All-forgiving, but stern in His retribution
41|44|Had We sent down this Quran in a non-Arabic language, they would have said, "Why have its verses not been well expounded?" Could a non-Arabic Book be revealed to an Arabic speaking person? (Muhammad), say, "It is a guide and a cure for the believers. As for those who do not believe, they are deaf and blind. It is as though they had been called from a distant place
41|45|We had given the Book to Moses about which people greatly disagreed. Had the word of your Lord not been decreed, He would have certainly settled their differences (there and then). They were greatly suspicious and doubtful about the Book of Moses
41|46|Whoever acts righteously does so for his own good and whoever commits evil does so against his soul. Your Lord is not unjust to His servants
41|47|It is He who has the knowledge of the Hour of Doom and the fruits that will come out of their covering. He knows what the females conceive and deliver. On the day when the unbelievers will be asked, "Where are the idols which you considered equal to God?," they will reply, "We declare that none of us have seen them
41|48|Whatever they had worshipped before will disappear and they will then know that there is no way for them to escape
41|49|The human being never tires of asking for good, but if he is afflicted by hardship, he despairs and gives up all hope
41|50|When We grant him mercy after his suffering, he (boldly) says, "This is what I deserved. I do not think that there will ever be a Day of Judgment. Even if I will be returned to my Lord, I shall still deserve to receive better rewards from Him." We shall certainly tell the unbelievers about their deeds and cause them to suffer a severe punishment
41|51|When We grant the human being a favor, he ignores it and turns away but when he is afflicted by hardship, he starts lengthy prayers
41|52|Say, "Think, if the (Quran) is from God and you have rejected it, then who has gone farther astray than the one who has wandered far from the truth
41|53|We shall (continue to) show them Our evidence in the world and within their souls until it becomes clear that the Quran is the truth. Is it not sufficient for you that your Lord witness all things
41|54|They are certainly doubtful about their meeting with their Lord. God indeed encompasses all things
42|1|Ha. Mim
42|2|Ayn. Sin. Qaf
42|3|(Muhammad), this is how God, the Majestic and All-wise, sends revelations to you and sent them to those who lived before you
42|4|To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. He is the Most High and the Most Great
42|5|(When the revelation passes through) the heavens, they almost break apart. At that time the angels glorify their Lord with His praise and seek forgiveness for those who live on earth. God is certainly All-forgiving and All-merciful
42|6|God is the guardian of even those who have chosen others (idols) besides Him as their guardians (Muhammad), you will not have to answer for them
42|7|We have revealed the Quran to you in the Arabic language so that you could warn the people of the Mother Town (Mecca) and those around it of the inevitable Day of Resurrection when some will go to Paradise and others to hell
42|8|Had God wanted, He could have made them all one single nation, but He grants mercy to whomever He wills. The unjust will have no guardian or helper
42|9|Have they chosen other guardians besides Him? God is the real Guardian and it is He who will bring the dead back to life. He has power over all things
42|10|Whatever differences you may have about the Quran, the final decision rests with God. In Him do I trust and to Him do I turn in repentance
42|11|He is the Originator of the heavens and the earth. He has made you and the cattle in pairs and has multiplied you by His creation. There is certainly nothing like Him. He is All-hearing and All-aware
42|12|In His hands are the keys of the heavens and the earth. He increases and determines the sustenance of whomever He wants. He has the knowledge of all things
42|13|He has plainly clarified the religion which is revealed to you and that which Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Jesus were commanded to follow (He has explained it) so that you would be steadfast and united in your religion. What you call the pagans to is extremely grave for them. God attracts to (the religion) whomever He wants and guides to it whoever turns to Him in repentance
42|14|Only after receiving the knowledge did people divide themselves into different groups because of rebellion among themselves. Had it not been for your Lord's giving them respite for an appointed time, He would certainly have settled their differences once and for all. Those who inherited the Book, from their quarrelsome predecessors, also have doubts and suspicions about it
42|15|Thus, (Muhammad), preach (My revelation) to the people and be steadfast (in your faith) as you have been commanded. Do not follow their desires but say, "I believe in the Book which God has sent down and I have been commanded to exercise justice among you. God is our Lord and your Lord. Each of us will be responsible for his own deeds. Let there be no disputes among us. God will bring us all together and to Him we shall all return
42|16|The disputes of those who quarrel about God, after pledging obedience to Him, will be void in the eyes of their Lord. Such people will be subject to His wrath and will suffer a severe torment
42|17|It is God who revealed the Book and the Balance for a truthful purpose. You never know. Perhaps the Hour of Doom is close at hand
42|18|The disbelievers want you to show them the Day of Judgment immediately while the believers are afraid of it for they know it to be the truth. Those who insist on disputing the Hour of Doom are certainly in plain error
42|19|God is kind to His servants. He gives sustenance to whomever He wants. He is All-powerful and Majestic
42|20|We shall increase the harvest of those who seek a good harvest in the life hereafter. However, those who want to have their harvest in this life will be given it but will have no share in the hereafter
42|21|Do they have idols who have established a religion without the permission of God? Had not it been for your Lord's giving them respite for an appointed time, He would certainly have settled their differences once and for all. The unjust will certainly suffer a painful torment
42|22|You can see that the unjust are afraid of the consequences of their deeds which will inevitably strike them. However, the righteously striving believers will live in the gardens wherein they will have whatever they want from their Lord. This is certainly the greatest reward
42|23|This is the glad news which God gives to His servants, the righteously striving believers. (Muhammad), say, "I do not ask you for any payment for my preaching to you except (your) love of (my near) relatives." Whoever achieves virtue will have its merit increased. God is All-forgiving and Appreciating
42|24|Do they say that he, (Muhammad), has invented falsehood against God? Had God wanted, He could have sealed up your heart. God causes falsehood to vanish and, by His words, firmly establishes the truth. He has full knowledge of what the hearts contain
42|25|It is He who accepts the repentance of His servants, forgives their evil deeds and knows all about what you do
42|26|He answers the prayers of the righteously striving believers and grants them increasing favors. The unbelievers will suffer a severe punishment
42|27|Had God given abundant sustenance to His servants, they would have certainly rebelled on earth, but He sends them a known measure of sustenance as He wills. He is All-aware of His servants and watches over them all
42|28|It is He who sends down the rain after they had lost hope and spreads out His mercy. He is the Guardian and the Most Praiseworthy
42|29|Some of the evidence (of His existence) are His creation of the heavens and the earth and the beasts which inhabit it. He has all the power to bring them together if He wishes this to be so
42|30|Whatever hardship befalls you is the result of your own deeds. God pardons many of your sins
42|31|You cannot challenge God on earth and you will have no one besides Him as your guardian or helper
42|32|Further evidence (of His existence) are the ships which stand as mountains in the sea
42|33|Had He wanted, He could have stopped the wind and let the ships remain motionless on the surface of the sea, in this there is evidence (of the Truth) for all those who are patient and grateful
42|34|or He could have destroyed them as punishment for the human being's deeds. However, God pardons many sins
42|35|He knows all those who dispute His revelations. They will find no way to escape from (His torment)
42|36|Whatever you have received is just a means of enjoyment for this life but the reward of God for the believers and those who trust in their Lord will be better and everlasting
42|37|(This reward will be for) those who keep away from major sins and indecency, who forgive when they are made angry
42|38|who have pledged their obedience to the Lord, who are steadfast in prayer, who conduct their affairs with consultation among themselves, who spend for the cause of God out of what We have given them
42|39|and those who, when suffering a great injustice, seek to defend themselves
42|40|The recompense for evil will be equivalent to the deed. He who pardons (the evil done to him) and reforms himself, will receive his reward from God. God certainly does not love the unjust
42|41|Those who successfully defend themselves after being wronged will not be questioned
42|42|Only those who do injustice to people and commit rebellion on earth for no reason will be questioned. They will suffer a painful torment
42|43|To exercise patience and forgive (the wrong done to one) is the proof of genuine determination
42|44|Whomever God has caused to go astray will find no guardian after this. You will see the unjust, on facing the torment, say, "Is there any way to turn back
42|45|You will see them exposed to the fire, subdued in humiliation, looking sideways at it pleadingly. However, at the same time, the believers will say, "The true losers are those who will lose their souls and families on the Day of Judgment. The unjust will certainly suffer everlasting torment
42|46|They will have no guardian or helper besides God. Whoever God has caused to go astray will never find the right direction
42|47|Pledge obedience to your Lord before the coming of the inevitable Day when you will find no refuge to escape from God's wrath and no one to defend you
42|48|(Muhammad), if they turn away from your message, know that We have not sent you as their keeper. Your duty is only to deliver the message. When We grant mercy to the human being, he becomes joyous, but when he is afflicted by evil as a result of his own deeds, he proves to be ungrateful
42|49|To God belongs the heavens and the earth. He created whatever He wanted. He grants males, female, or pairs of
42|50|offspring to whomever He wants. He causes whomever He wants to be childless. He is All-Knowing and All-Powerful
42|51|To no mortal does God speak but through revelation, from behind a curtain, or by sending a Messenger who reveals, by His permission whatever He pleases. He is the Most High and the All-wise
42|52|Thus, We have revealed a Spirit to you, (Muhammad), by Our command. Before, you did not even know what a Book or Faith was, but We have made the Quran as a light by which We guide whichever of Our servants We want. You certainly guide (people) to the right path
42|53|the path of God who is the owner of all that is in the heavens and the earth. To God certainly do all matters return
43|1|Ha. Mim
43|2|I swear by the illustrious Book
43|3|We have made it an Arabic reading text so that perhaps you may understand
43|4|It (the Quran) exists in the original Book with Us which is certainly Most Exalted, full of wisdom and (beyond linguistic structures)
43|5|Can We ignore sending you the Quran just because you are a transgressing people
43|6|How many Messengers did We send to the ancient people
43|7|No Prophet came to them whom they did not mock
43|8|We destroyed the strongest among them in power. The stories of the ancient people have already been mentioned
43|9|(Muhammad), if you ask them, "Who has created the heavens and the earth?" They will certainly say, "The Majestic and All-knowing God has created them
43|10|It is He who has made the earth for you as a cradle and has made roads therein so that you will perhaps seek guidance
43|11|It is He who has sent down water from the sky in a known measure by which He has given life to the dead earth. In the same way will you also be resurrected
43|12|It is He who has created everything in pairs and the ships and cattle for you to ride
43|13|so that perhaps when you ride them, you will recall the bounties of your Lord and when you establish your control over it you would say, "Glory belongs to Him who has made it subservient to us when we would not have been able to do so ourselves
43|14|To our Lord we shall all return
43|15|The pagans have considered some of His servants as His children. There is no doubt that the human being is simply ungrateful
43|16|Has God chosen some of His own creatures as daughters for Himself and has given you the preference of having sons
43|17|When one of them is given the glad news of the birth of a daughter, which they believe to be the only kind of child that the Beneficent God can have, his face blackens with anger
43|18|Does God choose for Himself the kind of children who grow up wearing ornaments and who are not strong enough to defend their rights
43|19|Do they say that the angels, who are the servants of the Beneficent God, are females? Have they witnessed their creation? Their words as such will be recorded and they will be questioned for it
43|20|The pagans say, "Had the Beneficent God wanted, we would not have worshipped them (idols)." Whatever they say is not based on knowledge. It is only a false conjecture
43|21|Had We, before sending the Quran, given them a book to which they now refer as an authority
43|22|In fact, they say, "We found our fathers following a certain belief and we now follow in their footsteps for our guidance
43|23|In the same way, whenever We had sent a Messenger before you to warn a town, the rich ones therein said, "We found our fathers following a certain belief and we follow in their footsteps
43|24|The Messengers would say, "Would you still follow in the footsteps of your fathers even if I was to bring you better guidance?" They would say, "We have no faith in your message
43|25|We took revenge on them. See how terrible the end of those who rejected (Or revelations) was
43|26|When Abraham said to his father and his people, "I boldly renounce what you worship
43|27|except for the One who has created me and will guide me
43|28|God made (belief in one God) an everlasting task for his successors, so that perhaps they would return (to Him)
43|29|In fact, We allowed them and their fathers to enjoy themselves until the truth and a strong Messenger came to them
43|30|When the truth came to them, they said, "This is magic and we have no faith in it
43|31|Then they said, "Why this Quran had not been revealed to a man from either of the two great towns
43|32|Do they distribute the mercy of your Lord? It is We who have distributed their sustenance in this world and raised the positions of some of them above the others so that they would mock each other. The mercy of your Lord is better than what they can amass
43|33|Were it not for the fear that all people would become one in disbelief, We would have made for the disbelievers in the Beneficent God ceilings out of silver and ladders by which they would climb up
43|34|doors for their houses, couches on which to recline
43|35|and other ornament of gold. All these are only the means of enjoyment in this world, but the pious will receive their reward from your Lord in the life hereafter
43|36|We shall make satan the companion of whoever ignores the remembrance of the Beneficent God
43|37|Satan will prevent them from the right path while they think that they have the right guidance
43|38|When he returns to us, he will say (to satan), "Would that there had been as long a distance between me and you as that between the East and West. What a terrible companion you have been
43|39|They will be told on the Day of Judgment, "Regret will never be of any benefit to you. You have done injustice to your souls and you will share the torment
43|40|(Muhammad), can you make the deaf hear or guide the blind or the one who is clearly in error
43|41|We shall revenge them either after your death
43|42|or show them to you suffering the torment with which We had threatened them. We are certainly dominant over them all
43|43|Follow devotedly that which is revealed to you. You are certainly on the right path
43|44|The Quran is a reminder to you and to your people and you will soon be questioned about it
43|45|You can ask Our Messengers whom We sent before you if We had commanded them to worship other gods besides the Beneficent God
43|46|We sent Moses to the Pharaoh and his nobles with Our miracles and he said, "I am the Messenger of the Lord of the Universe
43|47|When he showed them Our miracles, they started to laugh at them
43|48|Of all the miracles which We showed to them the latter ones were greater than the former. We struck them with torment so that perhaps they would return to Us
43|49|They said, "Magician, pray to your Lord for us through your covenant with Him (If he saves us from the torment), we shall certainly seek guidance
43|50|When We relieved them from the torment they suddenly turned back on their heels
43|51|The Pharaoh shouted to his people, "My people, is the kingdom of Egypt not mine? and can you not see that the streams flow from beneath my palace
43|52|Am I not better than this lowly man who can barely express himself
43|53|Why have bracelets of gold not been given to him and why have some angels not accompanied him
43|54|Thus, he made dimwits out of his people and they followed him. They, certainly, were a sinful people. When they invoked Our anger
43|55|We took revenge on them by drowning them all together
43|56|We made them become of the people of the past and an example for the coming generations
43|57|When the son of Mary was mentioned as an example, you people cried out in protest, saying
43|58|Are our gods any better than Jesus (for according to Muhammad), if our gods go to hell so too will Jesus. What they say is only a false argument. In fact, they are a quarrelsome people
43|59|Jesus was a servant of Ours to whom We had granted favors and whom We made as an example for the Israelites
43|60|Had We wanted, We could have made the angels as your successors on the earth
43|61|(Muhammad), tell them, "Jesus is a sign of the Hour of Doom. Have no doubt about it and follow me; this is the straight path
43|62|Let satan not prevent you from the right path. He is your sworn enemy
43|63|When Jesus came with clear proof (in support of his truthfulness), he said, "I have come to you with wisdom to clarify for you some of the matters in which you have disputes. Have fear of God and obey me
43|64|God is your Lord and my Lord, so worship Him. This is the right path
43|65|But certain groups created differences among themselves. Woe to the unjust. They will face a painful torment
43|66|Are they waiting for the Hour of Doom when the torment will suddenly strike them and they will not even realize from where it came
43|67|All intimate friends on that day will become each others enemies except for the pious
43|68|whom God will tell, "My servants, you need have no fear on this day, nor will you be grieved
43|69|Those who have faith in Our revelations and have submitted themselves to Our will
43|70|will be told, "Enter Paradise with your spouses in delight
43|71|Golden dishes and cups will be passed among them. All that the souls may desire and that may delight their eyes will be available therein. You will live therein forever
43|72|This is the Paradise which you have received as your inheritance by virtue of what you have done
43|73|You will have abundant fruits therein to consume
43|74|The criminals will live forever in the torment of hell. Their torment will not be relieved and they will despair of escaping
43|75|We had not done any injustice to them but they had wronged themselves
43|76|They will cry out, "Guard, let your Lord destroy us
43|77|The angelic guard will say, "You will have to stay
43|78|We brought you the truth but most of you disliked it
43|79|If the disbelievers persist in their disbelief, We shall also persist in punishing them
43|80|Do they think that We do not hear their secrets and whispers? We certainly can hear them and Our Messengers record it all
43|81|(Muhammad), say, "Had the Beneficent God really had a son, I would certainly have been the first one to worship him
43|82|The Lord of the heavens and the earth and the Throne is too glorious to be described in the way they describe Him
43|83|Leave them (to indulge) in their desires and play around until they face that day which has been promised to them
43|84|It is God who is the Lord of the heavens and is the Lord on earth. He is All-wise and All-knowing
43|85|Blessed is He to whom belongs the heavens, the earth and all that is between them and who has the knowledge of the Hour of Doom. To Him you will all return
43|86|Those whom they worship besides God are not able to intercede, except for those among them who believe in the Truth (God) and who know whom to intercede for
43|87|(Muhammad), if you ask them, "Who had created the idols?" They will certainly say, "God has created them." Why do you then turn away from God
43|88|(God has knowledge of Muhammad's words when he complains to Him), "My Lord, these, my people, do not believe
43|89|We have told him, "Ignore them and say to them 'farewell'. They will soon know the consequences of their deeds
44|1|Ha. Mim
44|2|I swear by the illustrious Book
44|3|that We have revealed the Quran on a blessed night to warn mankind
44|4|On this night, every absolute command coming from Us becomes distinguishable
44|5|The command that We have been sending
44|6|as a mercy (for the human being) from your Lord. Your Lord is All-hearing and All-knowing
44|7|He is the Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, if only you would have strong faith
44|8|There is only One Lord. It is He who gives life and causes things to die. He is your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers
44|9|In fact, the unbelievers have doubts because of excessive involvement in worldly affairs
44|10|Wait for the day (which will come before the Day of Judgment) when the sky will give out dense smoke
44|11|which will smother the people. They will say, "This is a painful torment
44|12|Lord, remove this torment from us for we are believers
44|13|How could this punishment bring them to their senses when a Messenger evidently had come to them
44|14|and they turned away, saying, "He is a trained and insane person
44|15|We shall remove the torment for a while but you will revert to your old ways
44|16|However, We shall truly take Our revenge on the day when the great seizure takes place
44|17|We had certainly tested the people of the Pharaoh before them to whom a noble Messengers had come, saying
44|18|Send the servants of God with me. I am a trustworthy Messenger sent to you
44|19|Do not consider yourselves above God? I shall show you a manifest authority (in support of my truthfulness)
44|20|I seek protection from my Lord and your Lord from your decision of stoning me
44|21|If you do not want to believe, leave me alone
44|22|Moses addressed his Lord, saying, "Lord, these people are sinners
44|23|We told him, "Leave the city with My servants during the night. You will be pursued
44|24|Cross the sea by cutting a path through it. Pharaoh's army will be drowned
44|25|How many were the gardens, springs
44|26|corn-fields, gracious mansions
44|27|and other bounties which they enjoyed yet left behind
44|28|We gave these as an inheritance to other people
44|29|The sky nor the earth cried for them, nor were they given respite
44|30|We rescued the Israelites from the humiliating torment
44|31|and from the Pharaoh. He was the chief of the transgressors
44|32|We gave preference to the Israelites over the other people with Our knowledge
44|33|and sent them revelations of which some were a clear trial for them
44|34|These people say
44|35|After we die, we shall never be raised to life again
44|36|Bring back to life our fathers if what you say is true
44|37|Are they better than the tribe of Tubba (name of a Yemenite tribal chief) and those who lived before them? We destroyed them. They were criminals
44|38|We have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them for Our own amusement
44|39|We have created them for a genuine purpose, but most people do not know
44|40|The appointed time for all of them will be the Day of Judgment
44|41|(when wrong will be distinguished from right). On this day friends will be of no benefit to one another, nor will they receive any help
44|42|except for those to whom God grants mercy. He is Majestic and All-merciful
44|43|The tree of Zaqqum
44|44|is food for the sinner
44|45|It will be like molted brass which will boil in the bellies
44|46|like water
44|47|(It will be said of such sinners), "Seize them and drag them into the middle of hell
44|48|Then pour unto their heads the boiling water to torment them
44|49|They will be told, "Suffer the torment. You had thought yourselves to be majestic and honorable
44|50|This is the torment that you persistently doubted
44|51|The pious ones will be in a secure place
44|52|amid gardens and springs
44|53|clothed in fine silk and rich brocade, sitting face to face with one another
44|54|We shall unite them to maidens with big black and white lovely eyes
44|55|They will be offered all kinds of fruits, in peace and security
44|56|They will not experience any death other than that which they have already been through
44|57|God will protect them from the torment of hell as a favor from your Lord. (Muhammad), this is certainly the greatest triumph
44|58|We have made the Quran easy for you to recite so that perhaps they may take heed
44|59|Wait (for God's decree) and they too will be waiting
45|1|Ha. Mim
45|2|This Book is revealed from God, the Majestic and All-wise
45|3|In the heavens and the earth there is evidence (of the Truth) for the believers
45|4|In your creation and in that of the beasts living on earth there is evidence of the Truth for the people who have strong faith
45|5|In the alternation of the night and the day, the sustenance which God has sent down from the sky to revive the barren earth, and in the changing of the direction of the winds there is evidence of the truth for the people of understanding
45|6|These are the revelations of God which We recite to you for a genuine purpose. In what statements other than God's and His revelations will they then believe
45|7|Woe to every sinful liar
45|8|He hears the revelations of God which are recited to him, then persists in his arrogance as if he had not even heard them. Tell him that he will suffer a painful torment
45|9|When he learns about some of Our revelations, he mocks them. Such people will suffer a humiliating torment
45|10|Hell is awaiting them and none of their deeds will be of any benefit to them, nor will any guardian whom they have chosen besides God. They will suffer a great torment
45|11|This (Quran) is a guidance. Those who reject the revelations of their Lord will suffer the most painful punishment
45|12|God has made the sea subservient to you so that ships sail on by His command and you seek His favors. Perhaps you will be grateful
45|13|He has also made subservient to you all that is in the heavens and the earth. In this there is evidence (of the Truth) for those who use their minds
45|14|Tell the believers to forgive those who do not have faith in the days of God (Day of Judgment) and Resurrection. God will give due recompense to all the people for their deeds
45|15|One who acts righteously does so for his own benefit and one who commits evil does so against his own soul. To your Lord you will all return
45|16|We gave the Book to the Israelites, the commandments, and prophethood, granted them pure sustenance, and gave them preference above all people
45|17|We also gave them clear evidence in support of the true religion. Only after having received knowledge did they create differences among themselves because of their rebelliousness. Your Lord will issue His decree concerning their differences on the Day of Judgment
45|18|We have established for you a code of conduct and a religion. Follow it and do not follow the desires of the ignorant people
45|19|They will never be sufficient (protection) for you in place of God. The unjust are each other's friends, but God is the guardian of the pious ones
45|20|This (Quran) is an enlightenment for the people and a guide and mercy for the people who have strong faith
45|21|Do the people who commit evil think that We shall make their life and death like that of the righteously striving believers? How terrible is their Judgment
45|22|God has created the heavens and the earth for a genuine purpose so that every soul will be duly recompensed for its deeds without being wronged
45|23|Have you seen the one who has chosen his desires as his lord? God has knowingly caused him to go astray, sealed his ears and heart and veiled his vision. Who besides God can guide him? Will they, then, not take heed
45|24|They have said, "The only life is this worldly life and here we shall live and die. It is only time which will destroy us" They have no knowledge about this. It is only their guesswork
45|25|When Our enlightening revelations are recited to them, their only argument against it is, "Bring our forefathers back to life if what you say is true
45|26|(Muhammad), say, "It is God who gives you life and causes you to die. He will bring you together on the inevitable Day of Judgment," but most people do not know
45|27|To God belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. On the day when the Hour of Doom arrives, the followers of falsehood will be lost
45|28|You will see all the people kneeling down. Everyone will be summoned to the Book (containing the record of their deeds). They will be told, "On this day you will be recompensed for what you have done
45|29|This is Our Book. It will tell you the truth. We have made a copy of all that you have done
45|30|The Lord will admit the righteously striving, believing people into His mercy. This is certainly a clear victory
45|31|To the unbelievers the Lord will say, "Were not Our revelations recited to you and did not you arrogantly reject them? You were a sinful people
45|32|When it was said that the promise of God is true and that the Hour would inevitably come, you said, "We do not know what the Hour of Doom is, we are suspicious about it and we are not convinced
45|33|Their evil deeds will be revealed to them and (the torment) which they had mocked will surround them
45|34|They will be told, "On this day We shall forget you in the same way that you had forgotten your coming into Our presence. Your dwelling will be hell fire and no one will help you
45|35|This is only because you had mocked the revelations of God and the worldly life had deceived you. On this day they will not be taken out of hell, nor will they be granted any favors
45|36|It is only God, Lord of the heavens and the earth and Lord of the Universe who deserves all praise
45|37|It is His greatness that dominates the heavens and the earth. He is the Majestic and All-wise
46|1|Ha. Mim
46|2|This Book is revealed from God the Majestic and All-wise
46|3|We have created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them ONLY for a genuine purpose and an appointed time. The unbelievers ignore that of which they have been warned
46|4|(Muhammad), ask them, "Have you thought about what you worship besides God? Show me which part of the earth they have created. Do they have a share in the creation of the heavens? Bring me a Book, revealed before this Quran, or any other proof based on knowledge to support your belief, if indeed you are truthful
46|5|Who is more astray than one who prays to things besides God; things that would not be able to answer his prayers even if he would wait till the Day of Judgment. They are not even aware of his prayers
46|6|When people will be resurrected, such gods will become their enemies and will reject their worship
46|7|When Our enlightening revelations are recited to them, the disbelievers, of the truth which has come to them, say, "This is plain magic
46|8|They say, "(Muhammad) has invented it (Quran) by himself." Say, "Had I invented it, you would not have been able to rescue me from God. He knows best what you say about it. He is our witness and He is All-forgiving and All-merciful
46|9|Say, "I am not the first Messenger. I do not know what will be done to me or to you. I follow only what has been revealed to me and my duty is only to give clear warning
46|10|Say, "What do you think will happen if this Quran is from God and you have rejected it? Besides, a witness from among the Israelites has testified to the divinity of a Book like it and believed in it (Quran) while you have arrogantly denied it. God does not guide the unjust
46|11|The disbelievers have said about the believers, "Had there been anything good in it (Quran), they could not have accepted it before us" Since they do not benefit from its guidance, they say, "It (Quran) is only a fabricated legend
46|12|Before this (Quran), the Book of Moses was a guide and a blessing. This Book confirms the Torah. It is in the Arabic language so that it may warn the unjust people, and give glad news to the righteous ones
46|13|Those who have said, "Our Lord is God," and are steadfast in their belief need have no fear or be grieved
46|14|They will be the dwellers of Paradise wherein they will live forever as a reward for what they have done
46|15|We have advised the human being to be kind to his parents; his mother bore him with hardship and delivered him while suffering a great deal of pain. The period in which his mother bore and weaned him lasted for thirty months. When he grew-up to manhood and became forty years old, he then said, "Lord, inspire me to give You thanks for the bounties you have granted to me and my parents, and to act righteously to please You. Lord, make my offspring virtuous. Lord I turn to you in repentance; I am a Muslim
46|16|These are the ones from whom We accept righteous deeds and ignore their bad deeds. They will be among the dwellers of Paradise. It is the true promise which was given to them
46|17|There are people who say to their parents, "Fie upon you! Are you telling us that we shall be raised from our graves? So many people have died before us and (none of them have been raised)" Their parents plead to God and say to their child, "Woe to you! Have faith; the promise of God is certainly true" They reply, "What you say is only ancient legends
46|18|Such people will be subject to the punishment of God, which was also decreed for many human beings and jinn before them. These people are certainly lost
46|19|Everyone will have a position proportionate to the degree of his deeds. Finally, God will recompense them for their deeds and they will not be wronged
46|20|On the day when the disbelievers will be exposed to the fire, they will be told, "You have spent your happy days during your worldly life and enjoyed them. On this day you will suffer a humiliating torment for your unreasonably arrogant manners on earth and for the evil deeds which you have committed
46|21|(Muhammad), recall the brother of the people of Ad, when he warned his people in the valley of al-ahqaf saying, "There existed many warners before and after him. Do not worship anything other than God. I am afraid for you about the torment of the great Day
46|22|They said, "Have you come to turn us away from our gods? Show us that with which you threaten us if you are truthful
46|23|He said, "Only God has the knowledge (of the coming of such torment). I preach to you the message that I have brought, but I can see that you are an ignorant people
46|24|When they saw the torment as a cloud proceeding to their valleys, they said, "This cloud will bring us rain." He said, "No, it is the torment which you wanted to suffer immediately. It is a wind bearing and painful torment
46|25|It will destroy everything by the will of its Lord" (Not very long after) nothing could be seen of them except their dwellings. Thus do We recompense the sinful people
46|26|We had established them more firmly in the land than you are. We had given them ears, eyes, and hearts but none of their ears, eyes, and hearts proved to be of any benefit to them; they rejected the revelations of God and the torment which they mocked brought upon them utter destruction
46|27|We destroyed some towns around you and showed you the evidence (of the Truth) so that perhaps you would turn (to God)
46|28|Why did the idols, whom they worshipped as a means of pleasing God, not help them? In fact, they proved to be the cause of their going astray and it were lies which they had falsely invented lies
46|29|We turned a party of jinn towards you to listen to the Quran. When they attended a Quranic recitation, they said to each other, "Be silent," and, when it was over, they turned back to their people, in warning
46|30|and said, "Our people, we have listened to the recitation of a Book revealed after Moses. It confirms the Books revealed before and guides to the Truth and the right path
46|31|Our people, respond favorably to the Messenger of God and believe in Him. He will forgive your sins and rescue you from the painful torment
46|32|Those who do not favorably respond to the Messenger of God should know that they cannot challenge God on earth and will not have anyone as their guardian besides Him. Such people are in plain error
46|33|Have they not seen that God has created the heavens and the earth and that He experienced no fatigue in doing this. He has the power to bring the dead back to life. Certainly He has power over all things
46|34|On the day when the disbelievers will be exposed to the fire, they will be asked, "Is this not real?" They will say, "Yes, Our Lord, it is real" He will say, "Suffer the torment for your disbelief
46|35|(Muhammad), exercise patience as did the steadfast Messengers. Do not try to make them suffer the torment immediately; on the day when they will see the torment with which they were threatened, they will think that they had lived no more than an hour. The message has been delivered. No one else will be destroyed except the evil doing people
47|1|God has made devoid of all virtue the deeds of those who have disbelieved and prevented others from the way of God
47|2|God forgives the sins and reforms the hearts of the righteously striving believers who have faith in what is revealed to Muhammad - which is the Truth from his Lord
47|3|This is because the disbelievers have followed falsehood and the believers have followed the Truth from their Lord. Thus God explains to the human being their own prospects
47|4|If you encounter the disbelievers in a battle, strike-off their heads. Take them as captives when they are defeated. Then you may set them free as a favor to them, with or without a ransom, when the battle is over. This is the Law. Had God wanted, He could have granted them (unbelievers) victory, but He wants to test you through each other. The deeds of those who are killed for the cause of God will never be without virtuous results
47|5|God will lead them to everlasting happiness and improve their condition
47|6|He will admit them into the Paradise which He has made known to them
47|7|Believers, if you help God, He will help you and make you steadfast (in your faith)
47|8|The fate of the disbelievers will be to stumble and their deeds will have no virtuous results
47|9|they have hated God's revelation, and thus, He has made their deeds devoid of all virtue
47|10|Have they not travelled through the land and seen the terrible end of those who lived before them? God brought upon them utter destruction and the disbelievers will also faced similar perdition
47|11|God is the guardian of the believers, but the disbelievers have no guardian
47|12|God will admit the righteously striving believers into the gardens wherein streams flow. However, the disbelievers who enjoyed themselves and ate like cattle will have for their dwelling hell fire
47|13|(Muhammad), how many towns, much more powerful than the one from which you have been expelled, have We destroyed and left helpless
47|14|Can the one who follows the authority of his Lord be considered equal to the one whose evil deeds are made to seem attractive to him and who follows his own desires
47|15|The garden, which is promised to the pious, is like one in which there are streams of unpolluted water, streams of milk of unchangeable taste, streams of delicious wine, and streams of crystal clear honey. Therein they will have all kinds of fruits and forgiveness from their Lord. On the other hand (can these people be considered like), those who will live forever in hell fire and will drink boiling water which will rip their intestines to bits
47|16|(Muhammad), some of them listen to you, but when they leave you they ask those who have received knowledge, "What did he say a few moments ago?" God has sealed the hearts of such people who have followed their worldly desires
47|17|God will increase the guidance and piety of those who seek guidance
47|18|Are they waiting for the Hour of Doom to suddenly approach them? Its signs have already appeared. How will they then come to their senses when the Hour itself will approach them
47|19|Know that God is the only Lord. Ask forgiveness for your sins and for the sins of the believing men and women. God knows when you move and when you rest
47|20|The believers say, "Why is a chapter about jihad - fighting for the cause of God - not revealed?" But when such a chapter, with clear commands and a mention of jihad is revealed, you will see those whose hearts are sick look at you as if suffering the agony of death. One can expect nothing better from them
47|21|Since they have (pledged) Us obedience and to speak reasonably, it would be more proper for them, when it is decided (that everyone must take part in the battle), to remain true (in their pledge to God)
47|22|If you ignore the commands of God would you then also spread evil in the land and sever the ties of kinship
47|23|God has condemned these people and made them deaf, dumb, and blind
47|24|Is it that they do not think about the Quran or are their hearts sealed
47|25|Those who have reverted to disbelief after guidance has become manifest to them, have been seduced and given false hopes by satan
47|26|This is because they have said to those who hate God's revelation, "We shall obey you in some matters." But God knows all their secrets
47|27|How terrible it will be for them when the angels take away their souls by striking their faces and their backs
47|28|for their following that which had incurred God's anger, and their hatred to please God. Thus, God has made their deeds devoid of all virtue
47|29|Do those whose hearts are sick think that God will never make their malice public
47|30|Had We wanted, We could have made you recognize their faces. You will certainly recognize them by the tone of their speech. God knows all your deeds
47|31|We shall certainly test you until We know those who strive hard for the cause of God and those who exercise patience. We will also examine your deeds
47|32|The disbelievers who prevent others from the way of God and give the Messengers a hard time - even after the guidance has been made clear to them - will never be able to cause any harm to God, and He will turn their deeds devoid of all virtue
47|33|Believers, obey God and the Messenger and do not invalidate your deeds
47|34|God will never forgive the disbelievers who prevent others from the way of God and who die as disbelievers
47|35|Do not be weak hearted and do not appeal for an (unjust) settlement; you have the upper hand. God is with you and He will never reduce the reward for your deeds
47|36|The worldly life is only a childish game. If you have faith and piety, you will receive your rewards and God will not ask you to pay for them
47|37|Should He ask for your possessions you would be niggardly as it would be hard for you to give. Thus, He would make your malice become public
47|38|It is you who are asked to spend for the cause of God, but some of you behave in a niggardly way. Whoever behaves miserly does so against his own soul. God is Self-sufficient and you are poor. If you were to turn away from Him, He would just replace you with another people, who will not be like you
48|1|We have granted to you, (Muhammad), a manifest victory
48|2|so that God will redeem the sins (which the pagans think you have committed against them) in the past or (you will commit) in the future. He will complete His favors to you, guide you to the right path
48|3|and grant you a majestic triumph
48|4|It is God who has given confidence to the hearts of the believers to increase and strengthen their faith. To God belongs the armies of the heavens and the earth. He is All-knowing and All-wise
48|5|So that He would admit the believers (both male and female) to the gardens wherein streams flow, to live therein forever. He will redeem them. This is the greatest triumph in the sight of God
48|6|so that He would punish the hypocrites and the pagans who have evil suspicions about God. It is they who are surrounded by evil and have become subject to the wrath and condemnation of God. He has prepared for them hell, a terrible place to live
48|7|To God belong the armies of the heavens and the earth. God is Majestic and All-wise
48|8|We have sent you as a witness, a bearer of glad news, and a warner
48|9|so that you (people) may believe in God and His Messenger, help, and respect God and glorify Him in the morning and the evening
48|10|Those who pledge obedience to you are, in fact, pledging obedience to God. The hands of God are above their hands. As for those who disregard their pledge, they do so only against their own souls. Those who fulfill their promise to God will receive a great reward
48|11|The bedouins who lag behind in taking part in the battle say to you, "Ask forgiveness for us; we were busy with our property and household." They speak what is not in their hearts. (Muhammad), tell them, "Who will help you against God, if He intends to harm you, who will prevent Him from benefitting you? In fact, God is Well Aware of whatever you do
48|12|You thought the Messenger and the believers would never ever return to their families and this attracted your hearts and caused you to develop evil suspicions. You are a wrong doing people
48|13|Those who do not believe in God and His Messenger should know that We have prepared hell for the disbelievers
48|14|To God belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He forgives or punishes whomever He wants. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
48|15|The laggardly Bedouins will say, "When you leave to collect the spoils, let us follow you." They want to alter the command of God (that only the participating believers are entitled to such benefit). Tell them, "You can never follow us for such a purpose. God has said before and He will say again (what type of people you are). In fact, you are jealous of us." The truth is that they understand very little
48|16|Tell the laggardly Bedouins, "You will be called to face strong people whom you will fight right to the end or who will submit to you. If you obey the Messenger, God will give you a good reward. But if you turn away as you did before, God will make you suffer a painful torment
48|17|It is not an offense for the blind, the lame, or the sick not to take part in the battle. Whoever obeys God and His Messenger will be admitted to the gardens wherein streams flow. God will make whoever turns away suffer a painful torment
48|18|God is pleased with the believers for their pledging obedience to you under the tree. He knew whatever was in their hearts, thus, He granted them confidence and rewarded them with an immediate victory
48|19|and the booty which they received from it (the Battle). God is Majestic and All-wise
48|20|God has promised that you will receive much booty. He has enabled you to receive this at this time and has protected you from enemies to make it an evidence (of the Truth) for the believers. He will guide you to the right path
48|21|Besides these, there were other gains which you could not receive, but God has full control over them. God has power over all things
48|22|Had the disbelievers fought against you, they would have run away from the battle and would have found no guardian or helper
48|23|This is the tradition of God which existed before, and you will never find any change in His tradition
48|24|It is He who kept peace between you and the people of the valley of Mecca after having given you a victory over them. God is Well Aware of what you do
48|25|It was the disbelievers who kept you from the Sacred Mosque and prevented your sacrificial offering from reaching its proper place. God would not have kept you from fighting the disbelievers, had there not been believing men and women (among them) whom you did not know and whom you might have unknowingly harmed. God did this because He grants mercy to whomever He wants. Had they been distinguishable from the believers, We would certainly have punished them with a painful torment
48|26|Since the disbelievers held zealous ignorance in their hearts, like that of the pre-Islamic age of darkness, God gave confidence to His Messenger and to the believers, binding them to the principle of piety which they deserve. God has the knowledge of all things
48|27|God made the dream of His Messenger come true for a genuine purpose. (In this he was told), "If God wills You (believers) will enter the Sacred Mosque, in security, with your heads shaved, nails cut, and without any fear in your hearts." He knew what you did not know. Besides this victory, He will give you another immediate victory
48|28|It is He who has sent His Messenger with guidance and the true religion to make it prevail over all other religions. God is a Sufficient witness to this Truth
48|29|Muhammad is the Messenger of God and those with him are stern to the disbelievers yet kind among themselves. You can see them bowing and prostrating before God, seeking His favors and pleasure. Their faces (foreheads) are marked due to the effect of their frequent prostrations. That is their description in the Torah and in the Gospel they are mentioned as the seed which shoots out its stalk then becomes stronger, harder and stands firm on its stumps, attracting the farmers. Thus, God has described the believers to enrage the disbelievers. God has promised forgiveness and a great reward to the righteously striving believers
49|1|Believers, do not be presumptuous with the Messenger of God (in your deeds and in your words). Have fear of God; He is All-hearing and All-knowing
49|2|Believers, do not raise your voices above the voice of the Prophet, do not be too loud in speaking to him [as you may have been to one another], lest your deeds will be made devoid of all virtue without your realizing it
49|3|The hearts of those who lower their voices in the presence of the Messenger of God are tested by God through piety. They will have forgiveness and a great reward
49|4|Most of those who call you from behind the private chambers do not have any understanding
49|5|Had they exercised patience until you had come out, it would have been better for them. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
49|6|Believers, if one who publicly commits sins brings you any news, ascertain its truthfulness carefully, lest you harm people through ignorance and then regret what you have done
49|7|Know that the Messenger of God is with you. Had he yielded to you on many of the matters, you would have been in great trouble. But God has endeared the faith to you and has made it attractive to your hearts. He has made disbelief, evil deeds and disobedience hateful to you. Such people will have the right guidance
49|8|as a favor and a blessing from God. God is All-knowing and All-wise
49|9|If two parties among the believers start to fight against each other, restore peace among them. If one party rebels against the other, fight against the rebellious one until he surrenders to the command of God. When he does so, restore peace among them with justice and equality; God loves those who maintain justice
49|10|Believers are each other's brothers. Restore peace among your brothers. Have fear of God so that perhaps you will receive mercy
49|11|Believers, let not a group of you mock another. Perhaps they are better than you. Let not women mock each other; perhaps one is better than the other. Let not one of you find faults in another nor let anyone of you defame another. How terrible is the defamation after having true faith. Those who do not repent are certainly unjust
49|12|Believers, stay away from conjecture; acting upon some conjecture may lead to sin. Do not spy on one another or back-bite. Would any of you like to eat the disgusting dead flesh of your brother? Have fear of God; God accepts repentance and is All-merciful
49|13|People, We have created you all male and female and have made you nations and tribes so that you would recognize each other. The most honorable among you in the sight of God is the most pious of you. God is All-knowing and All-aware
49|14|The bedouin Arabs have said, "We are believers." Tell them, "You are not believers, but you should say that you are Muslims. In fact, belief has not yet entered your hearts. If you obey God and His Messenger, nothing will be reduced from your deeds. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
49|15|The believers are those who believe in God and His Messenger, who do not change their belief into doubt and who strive hard for the cause of God with their property and persons. They are the truthful ones
49|16|(Muhammad), say, "Do you teach God about your religion? God knows whatever is in the heavens and the earth. He has the knowledge of all things
49|17|(The bedouins tell you that) you owe them (a great deal) for their embracing Islam. Tell them, "You are not doing me any favors by embracing Islam. In fact, it is God who has done you a great favor by guiding you to the faith. (Think about this) if you are people of truth
49|18|God knows whatever is unseen in the heavens and in the earth. He is Well Aware of what you do
50|1|By Qaf and the glorious Quran, (you are the Messenger of God)
50|2|In fact, it seems odd (to the pagans) that a warner from their own people has come to them. The disbelievers have said, "It is very strange
50|3|that after we die and become dust, we shall be brought back to life again. This seems far from reality
50|4|We already know how much of them (of their bodies) the earth will consume. With Us there is a Book that contains all records
50|5|In fact, they have rejected the truth that has come to them, thus, they live in confusion
50|6|Have they not seen how We have established the sky above them and decked it without gaps and cracks
50|7|(Have they not seen) how We have spread out the earth, placed on it firm mountains and have made all kinds of flourishing pairs of plants grow
50|8|This is a reminder and it sharpens the insight of every servant of God who turns to Him in repentance
50|9|We have sent blessed water down from the sky to grow gardens, harvestable crops
50|10|and tall palm-trees with clusters of dates
50|11|as sustenance for My servants. With this We have brought the dead land back to life. Thus, will also be your resurrection
50|12|The people of Noah, dwellers of the Ra's, Thamud
50|13|Ad, the Pharaoh, Lot
50|14|dwellers of the forest, and the people of Tubba had all rejected the Prophets. Thus, they became subject to Our torment
50|15|Did We fail to accomplish the first creation? Of course, We did not; We have all power over all things. Yet they are confused about a new creation
50|16|We swear that We have created the human being and We know what his soul whispers to him. We are closer to him than even his jugular vein
50|17|Since the two scribes are sitting on each of his shoulders, he does not utter a word which is not recorded immediately by the watchful scribes
50|18|The human being will certainly experience the agony of death
50|19|and (the human being will be told), "This is what you had been trying to run away from
50|20|The trumpet will certainly be sounded. This will be the day (about which you) were threatened
50|21|Every soul will be accompanied (by an angel) behind him and another as a witness
50|22|(He will be told), "You were completely heedless of this day. We have removed the veil from your eyes and your vision will now be sharp and strong
50|23|His (angelic) companion will say, "(Lord), the record of his deeds is with me and is all ready
50|24|(They will be told,) "Throw into hell every persistent disbelievers
50|25|who is an opponent of good, a suspicious transgressor
50|26|and an idol worshipper. Throw him into severe torment
50|27|His satanic companion will say, "Our Lord, I did not mislead him, but he himself went astray
50|28|The Lord will say, "Do not argue in My presence; I had certainly sent you a warning
50|29|No word is to be exchanged in My presence. I am not unjust to My servants
50|30|On that day We shall ask hell, "Are you full?" It will say, "Are there any more
50|31|Paradise will be brought near for the pious ones
50|32|(and they will be told), "This is what you were promised. It is for everyone who turned in repentance to God, kept his promise
50|33|feared the Beneficent God in secret, and turned to Him with a repenting heart
50|34|(They will be told), "Enter Paradise in peace and, therein, you will live forever
50|35|They will have therein whatever they want and will receive from Us more rewards
50|36|How many an ancient town who were much stronger than them (unbelievers) did We destroy. (In vain), they wandered through the land in search of a place of refuge from Our torment
50|37|This is a reminder for everyone who understands, listens, and sees
50|38|We created the heavens, the earth, and all that is between them in six days without experiencing any fatigue
50|39|(Muhammad), exercise patience against what they say. Glorify your Lord with His praise before sunrise and sunset
50|40|Glorify Him during the night and also glorify Him after prostration
50|41|Wait for the day when the trumpet will be sounded from a nearby place
50|42|On that day they will certainly hear the sound of the trumpet and that will be the Day of Resurrection
50|43|We give life and cause things to die. To Us all things will return
50|44|On the day when the earth is rent asunder, they will quickly come out of their graves. This is how easy it is for Us to bring about the Day of Resurrection
50|45|We know best what they say and you cannot compel them. Remind, by way of the Quran, those who have fear of My warnings
51|1|By the winds which carry dust particles
51|2|by the clouds which are heavily loaded with water
51|3|by the ships which smoothly sail on the oceans
51|4|by the angels which distribute the affairs
51|5|that what you are promised is certainly true
51|6|and the Day of Judgment will inevitably take place
51|7|By the beautiful heavens
51|8|your ideas are confused
51|9|Let whoever wishes, turn away from Our Quran
51|10|Death to those whose opinions are merely baseless conjectures
51|11|and who wander in the abyss of confusion
51|12|They ask, "When it will be the Day of Judgment
51|13|On the Day of Judgment they will be punished by the fire
51|14|and will be told, "Suffer the torment which you wanted to experience immediately
51|15|The pious ones will live amidst gardens and springs
51|16|receiving their reward from their Lord. They had been righteous people before the Day of Judgment
51|17|They slept very little during the night
51|18|and asked for forgiveness in the early morning
51|19|They assigned a share of their property for the needy and the destitute
51|20|In the earth there is evidence (of the Truth) for those who have strong faith
51|21|There is also evidence of the Truth within your own selves. Will you then not see
51|22|In the heavens there is your sustenance and that which you were promised (Paradise)
51|23|This, by the Lord of the heavens and the earth is as certain as your ability to speak
51|24|Have you heard the story of the honorable guests of Abraham
51|25|When they came to him saying, "Peace be with you," he replied to their greeting in the same manner and said to himself, "These are a strange people
51|26|He went quietly to his wife and returned to his guests with a fat, roasted calf
51|27|He placed it before them. Then he said, "Why are you not eating
51|28|He began to feel afraid. They said, "Do not be afraid," and then gave him the glad news of the birth of a knowledgeable son
51|29|His wife came forward, crying and beating her face, saying, "I am an old barren woman
51|30|They said, "This is true but your Lord has said, (that you will have a son); He is All-wise and All-knowing
51|31|Abraham asked, "Messengers, what is your task
51|32|They replied, "We have been sent to a sinful people
51|33|to bring down upon them showers of marked lumps of clayy
51|34|They are transgressors in the presence of your Lord
51|35|We saved the believers among them
51|36|but We found only one Muslim house
51|37|We left therein evidence for those who fear the painful torment
51|38|There is also evidence (of the Truth) in the story of Moses when We sent him to the Pharaoh with clear authority
51|39|The Pharaoh and his forces turned away from him, saying, "He is either a magician or an insane person
51|40|We seized him and his army and threw them into the sea. He himself was to be blamed
51|41|There is also evidence of the Truth in the story of Ad whom We struck with a violent wind
51|42|which turned everything it approached into dust
51|43|There is also evidence (of the Truth) in the story of the Thamud, who were told to enjoy themselves for an appointed time
51|44|They transgressed against the command of their Lord. So a blast of sound struck them and they were unable to do anything but stare
51|45|They were unable to stand up, nor were they helped
51|46|The people of Noah who lived before them were also evil doing people
51|47|We have made the heavens with Our own hands and We expanded it
51|48|We have spread out the earth and how brilliantly it is spread
51|49|We have created everything in pairs so that perhaps you may take heed
51|50|(Muhammad), tell them,"Seek refuge in God. I have been sent from Him to plainly warn you
51|51|Do not choose other gods besides Him. I have been sent from Him to plainly warn you
51|52|In the same way no Messenger came to those who lived before them without his people calling him a magician or an insane person
51|53|Have they inherited such dealings with the Prophets from their predecessors or are they a rebellious people
51|54|(Muhammad), leave them alone and you will not be blamed
51|55|Keep on reminding them. This benefits the believers
51|56|We have created jinn and human beings only that they might worship Me
51|57|I do not expect to receive any sustenance from them or that they should feed Me
51|58|It is God Who is the Sustainer and the Lord of invincible strength
51|59|The unjust will bear a burden like that of their unjust predecessors. Let them not make Me bring immediate punishment upon them
51|60|Woe to the disbelievers when the day with which they have been threatened comes
52|1|By the Mount (Sinai)
52|2|by the book (Torah) written
52|3|on parchment for distribution
52|4|by the established House (Mecca)
52|5|by the high ceiling (heaven)
52|6|and by the swelling ocean
52|7|the torment of your Lord will inevitably take place
52|8|and no one will be able to prevent it
52|9|On the day when the heavens will swiftly fly
52|10|and the mountains quickly move
52|11|Woe will be to those who rejected the Truth
52|12|and who indulged in false disputes against (God's revelations)
52|13|On that day they will be violently pushed into the fire
52|14|and they will be told, "This is the fire which you called a lie
52|15|Is it magic or do you not still see
52|16|Burn in its heat. It is all the same for you whether you exercise patience or not; This is the recompense for your deeds
52|17|The pious will live in bountiful Paradise
52|18|talking of what they have received from their Lord and of how their Lord has saved them from the torment of hell
52|19|They will be told, "Eat and drink to your heart's delight for what you have done
52|20|They will recline on couches arranged in rows and We shall couple them with maidens with large, lovely eyes
52|21|The offspring of the believers will also follow them to Paradise. So shall We join their offspring to them because of their faith. We shall reduce nothing from their deeds. Everyone will be responsible for his own actions
52|22|We shall provide them with fruits and the meat of the kind which they desire
52|23|They will pass cups of un-intoxicating and unsinful wine to one another
52|24|They will be served by youths who will be as beautiful as pearls
52|25|They will turn to one another ask questions
52|26|saying, "We were afraid while in the world
52|27|But God has granted us favors and saved us from the scorching heat of the torment
52|28|We had prayed to Him; He is Kind and All-merciful
52|29|(Muhammad), remind them, by the Grace of your Lord, that you are neither a soothsayer or an insane person
52|30|Do they say, "He is only a poet and we are waiting to see him die
52|31|Say, "Wait, I too am waiting with you
52|32|Does their reason tell them to say this or is it because they are a rebellious people
52|33|Do they say, "He has falsely invented it (the Quran)?" In fact, they themselves have no faith
52|34|Let them produce a discourse like it if they are true in their claim
52|35|Have they been created from nothing or are they themselves their own creators
52|36|Have they created the heavens and the earth? In fact, they have no strong faith
52|37|Do they own the treasures of your Lord? Have they any authority over God
52|38|Do they have a ladder (by which they can climb up to the heavens) and listen (to the angels) and come back to the rest of the people with clear authority
52|39|Do the daughters belong to Him and the sons to you
52|40|Do you (Muhammad) ask them for any payment (for your preaching) which they cannot afford
52|41|Do they have knowledge of the unseen, thus, are able to predict (the future)
52|42|Do they design evil plans? The disbelievers themselves will be snared by their evil plots
52|43|Do they have another god besides God? God is too exalted to be considered equal to the idols
52|44|Even if they were to see a part of the heavens falling down upon them, they would say, "It is only dense cloud
52|45|So leave them alone until they face the day when they will be struck dead from terror
52|46|and when their evil plans will be of no benefit to them nor will they be helped
52|47|The unjust will suffer other torments besides this but most of them do not know
52|48|Wait patiently for the command of your Lord. We are watching over you. Glorify your Lord when you rise during the night
52|49|and glorify Him after the setting of the stars
53|1|By the declining star
53|2|your companion is not in error nor has he gone astray
53|3|He does not speak out of his own desires
53|4|It is a revelations which has been revealed to him
53|5|and taught to him
53|6|by the great mighty one (Gabriel)
53|7|the strong one who appeared on the uppermost horizon
53|8|He (Gabriel) then came nearer and nearer
53|9|until he was as close to him as the distance of two bows, or even less
53|10|He revealed to God's servant whatever he wanted
53|11|His (Muhammad's) heart did not lie to him about what his eyes had seen
53|12|Will you then argue with him about what he saw
53|13|He certainly saw him (Gabriel) during his other ascent
53|14|to the Lot-tree (in the seven heavens)
53|15|near which is Paradise
53|16|When the tree was covered with a covering
53|17|(Muhammad's) eyes did not deceive him, nor did they lead him to falsehood
53|18|He certainly saw the greatest (signs) of the existence of his Lord
53|19|(Can anything as such be considered true) of al-Lat, al-Uzza
53|20|and your third idol al-Manat (whom you considered as God's daughters)
53|21|Do sons belong to you and daughters to God
53|22|This is an unfair distinction
53|23|These are only names given by yourselves and your fathers. God has not given them any authority. They, (unbelievers), only follow mere conjecture and the desires of their souls, even though guidance has already come to them from their Lord
53|24|Can the human being have whatever he wishes
53|25|All that is in the life to come and all that is in this life belongs only to God
53|26|There are many angels in the heavens whose intercession will be of no benefit unless God grants such permission to whichever of them He wants
53|27|Only those who do not believe in the life hereafter call the angels, females. They have no knowledge about it
53|28|They only follow mere conjecture which can never sufficiently replace the Truth
53|29|(Muhammad), stay away from those who turn away from Our guidance and who do not desire anything except the worldly life
53|30|This is what the extent of their knowledge amounts to. Your Lord knows best who has gone astray from His path and who has been rightly guided
53|31|To God belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth. In the end God will re-compense the evil doers for their deeds and reward the righteous ones for their deeds
53|32|Those who stay away from grave sins and indecency (should know that) for their trivial sins your Lord's forgiveness is vast. He knows best about you. When He created you from the earth and when you were embryos in your mother's wombs. Do not consider yourselves very great. God knows best who is the most righteous person
53|33|(Muhammad), have you ever seen the one who has turned away (from guidance)
53|34|and grudgingly spends very little for the cause of God
53|35|Does he possess the knowledge of the unseen, thus, he sees (all things)
53|36|Has not he been informed of the contents of the Book of Moses
53|37|and about Abraham who fulfilled his duty (to God)
53|38|Certainly no one will bear the responsibility of the sins of another
53|39|nor can man achieve anything without hard labor
53|40|He will certainly see the result of his labor
53|41|and will be fully recompensed for his deeds
53|42|To your Lord will all things eventually return
53|43|It is He who causes laughter and weeping
53|44|It is He who causes death and gives life
53|45|It is He who has created spouses, male and female
53|46|from a discharged living germ
53|47|and on Him depends the life hereafter
53|48|It is He who grants people temporary and durable wealth
53|49|It is He who is the Lord of Sirius
53|50|It is He who utterly destroyed the ancient tribes of Ad
53|51|Thamud
53|52|and the people of Noah; they were the most unjust and rebellious people
53|53|It is He who turned upside down the people of Lot
53|54|and covered them with torment
53|55|About which of the bounties of your Lord can they persistently dispute
53|56|This is a (Prophet) like that of the ancient warners (Prophets)
53|57|The Day of Judgment is drawing nearer
53|58|No one besides God can rescue a soul from hardship
53|59|Does this statement seem strange to them
53|60|and do they laugh instead of weeping
53|61|indulging in carelessly idle games
53|62|So prostrate yourselves before God and worship him
54|1|The Hour of Doom is drawing near and the moon is rent asunder
54|2|Whenever they see a miracle, they turn away from it and say, "This is just a powerful magic
54|3|They have rejected it and have followed their own desires, but all matters will be settled (by God)
54|4|They have certainly received the kind of news in which there is a lesson and strong words of wisdom
54|5|but the warnings have proved to have no effect on them
54|6|(Muhammad), leave them alone. On the day when they will be called to a terrible punishment
54|7|they will come out of their graves, their eyes cast down, hastening towards their Summoner as locusts rushing about
54|8|These disbelievers will say, "This is a hard day
54|9|The people of Noah, who lived before them, had also rejected (Our guidance). They rejected Our servant and said, "He is an insane person so let us drive him away
54|10|Noah prayed, "Lord, help me; I am defeated
54|11|We opened the gates of the sky and water started to pour down
54|12|We caused the earth to burst forth with springs so that the waters could come together for a predestined purpose
54|13|We carried him, (Noah), on a vessel built with boards fixed together with nails
54|14|which floated on the water before Our very eyes. The flood was a recompense for the deeds of the disbelievers
54|15|We made (the story of Noah) as evidence of the Truth. However, is there anyone who would take heed
54|16|How terrible was My torment and the result of (their disregard) of My warning
54|17|We have made the Quran easy to understand, but is there anyone who would pay attention
54|18|The people of `Ad rejected Our guidance. How terrible was My torment and the result (of their disregard) of My warning
54|19|On an unfortunate day We sent upon them a continuous violent wind
54|20|which hurled people around like uprooted trunks of palm-trees
54|21|How terrible was Our torment and the result of (their disregard) of Our warning
54|22|We have made the Quran easy to understand, but is there anyone who would pay attention
54|23|The people of Thamud rejected Our warnings
54|24|They said, "Should we follow only one person among us. We shall be clearly in error and in trouble (if we do so)
54|25|How is it that he has received guidance? In fact, he is the most untruthfull and arrogant person
54|26|(We told Salih), "Tomorrow they will know who is the most arrogant liar
54|27|We are sending the she-camel to them to test them. So watch them and be patient
54|28|Tell them that each one of them has the right to have a certain share of water
54|29|They called together their companions and agreed to slay the she-camel
54|30|How terrible was My punishment and warning
54|31|We sent upon them a single blast of sound and they were left like hay to be used by the cattle
54|32|We made the Quran easy to understand, but is there anyone who would take heed
54|33|The people of Lot rejected Our warning
54|34|We sent down upon them a violent sandstorm (which destroyed them all) except for the family of Lot, whom We saved in the early morning by Our favor
54|35|Thus do We recompense the grateful ones
54|36|Lot warned them against Our torment, but they persistently disputed it
54|37|They demanded that he turn over his guests to them
54|38|We struck their faces, blinded them and said, "Suffer Our torment of which you were warned
54|39|One early morning Our torment brought upon them utter destruction. We said, "Suffer Our torment of which you were warned
54|40|We have made the Quran easy to understand, but is there anyone who would pay attention
54|41|The Pharaoh and his people had also received Our warning
54|42|but they rejected all Our miracles. So We seized them in the way that a Majestic and All-powerful One would
54|43|Are you disbelievers mightier than those of the nations which We destroyed before or have you received amnesty through the ancient Scriptures
54|44|Do they say, "We shall be victorious because we are united
54|45|(Let them know that) this united group will soon run away in defeat
54|46|In fact, the Hour of Doom is the time for them to suffer. The suffering of this hour is the most calamitous and the most bitter (of all suffering)
54|47|The sinful ones will face the destructive torment of hell
54|48|when they will be dragged on their faces into the fire and will be told, "Feel the touch of hell
54|49|We have created everything to fulfill a certain purpose
54|50|It takes only a single command from Us (to bring the Day of Judgment) and that can be achieved within the twinkling of an eye
54|51|We destroyed many people like you (disbelievers) but is there anyone who would take heed (of Our warning)
54|52|Whatever they have done has been recorded in the Books (records of the deeds)
54|53|Every small or great deed is written down
54|54|The pious ones will live in Paradise wherein streams flow
54|55|honorably seated in the presence of the All-dominant King
55|1|The Beneficent (God)
55|2|has taught the Quran to (Muhammad)
55|3|He created the human being
55|4|and has taught him intelligible speech
55|5|The sun and moon rotate in a predestined orbit
55|6|The plants and trees prostrate before Him
55|7|He raised the heavens and set up everything in balance
55|8|so that you would maintain justice
55|9|Therefore, maintain just measure and do not transgress against the Balance
55|10|He spread out the earth for the people
55|11|There exists all kinds of fruits, palm-trees with sheathed blossoms
55|12|grain with its husk and aromatic herbs
55|13|(Jinn and mankind) - which of the favors of your Lord do you deny
55|14|He created the human being from clay like that used for pottery
55|15|and jinn from the many colored flames of fire
55|16|(Jinn and mankind) - which of the favors of your Lord do you deny
55|17|He is the Lord of the East and West through all seasons
55|18|(Jinn and mankind) - which of the favors of your Lord do you then deny
55|19|He has made the two oceans meet each other
55|20|but has created a barrier between them so that they will not merge totally
55|21|(Jinn and mankind) - which of the favors of your Lord do you then deny
55|22|From the two oceans comes pearls and coral
55|23|(Jinn and mankind) - which of the favors of your Lord would you then deny
55|24|By His command, the ships with raised masts sail on the sea like mountains
55|25|(Jinn and mankind) - which of the favors of your Lord do you then deny
55|26|Everyone on earth is destined to die
55|27|Only the Supreme Essence of your Glorious and Gracious Lord will remain forever
55|28|(Jinn and mankind) - which of the favors of your Lord do you then deny
55|29|Everyone in the heavens and the earth depends on Him. His task in preserving His creation is continuous
55|30|(Jinn and mankind) - which of the favors of your Lord do you then deny
55|31|Jinn and mankind, We shall certainly settle your accounts
55|32|(Jinn and mankind) - which of the favors of your Lord would you then deny
55|33|Jinn and mankind, if you can penetrate the diameters of the heavens and the earth, do so, but you cannot do so without power and authority
55|34|(Jinn and mankind) - which of the favors of your Lord would you then deny
55|35|Flames of fire and molten brass will be released against you and you will not be able to protect yourselves
55|36|(Jinn and mankind) - which of the favors of your Lord do you then deny
55|37|(On the Day of Judgment) when the heavens are rent asunder they will have a flowery color and flow like oil
55|38|(Jinn and mankind) - which of the favors of your Lord do you then deny
55|39|On that day there will be no need to ask mankind or jinn about his sin
55|40|(Jinn and mankind) - which of the favors of your Lord would you then deny
55|41|The guilty ones will be recognized by their faces and will be seized by their forelocks and feet
55|42|(Jinn and mankind) - which of the favors of your Lord do you then deny
55|43|(The guilty ones will be told), "This is hell which the sinful ones denied
55|44|They will run around in blazing fire and boiling water
55|45|(Jinn and mankind) - which of the favors of your Lord would you then deny
55|46|Those who fear their Lord will have two gardens
55|47|(jinn and mankind) - which of the favors of your Lord would you then deny
55|48|full of various trees
55|49|(Jinn and mankind) - which of the favors of your Lord would you then deny
55|50|In the two gardens there will be two flowing springs
55|51|(Jinn and mankind) - which of the favors would you then deny
55|52|In them there are pairs of each kind of fruit
55|53|(Jinn and mankind) - which of the favors of your Lord would you then deny
55|54|(The dwellers of Paradise) will recline on couches lined with silk brocade and it will be easy to reach the ripe fruits from the two gardens
55|55|(Jinn and mankind) - which of the favors of your Lord would you then deny
55|56|There will be bashful maidens untouched by mankind or jinn before
55|57|jinn and mankindwhich of the favors of your Lord would you then deny
55|58|who are as beautiful as rubies and pearls
55|59|(Jinn and mankind) - which of the favors of your Lord would you then deny
55|60|Can any thing else be a response to a favor but a favor
55|61|(Jinn and mankind) - which of the favors of your Lord would you then deny
55|62|Besides this, there will be two other gardens
55|63|jinn and mankind - which of the favors of your Lord would you then deny
55|64|dark green in color
55|65|(Jinn and mankind) - which of the favors of your Lord would you then deny
55|66|In these there will also be two springs gushing forth
55|67|(Jinn and mankind) - which of the favors of your Lord would you then deny
55|68|In both gardens there will be fruits, palm-trees, and pomegranates
55|69|(Jinn and mankind) - which of the favors of your Lord would you then deny
55|70|There will be well-disciplined, beautiful maidens
55|71|jinn and mankind - which of the favors of your Lord would you then deny
55|72|with big, black and white beautiful eyes, dwelling in tents
55|73|jinn and mankind - which of the favors of your Lord would you then deny
55|74|untouched by jinn or mankind before
55|75|(Jinn and mankind) - which of the favors of your Lord would you then deny
55|76|They will be reclining on plain green and beautifully printed cushions
55|77|(Jinn and mankind) - which of the favors of your Lord would you then deny
55|78|Blessed is the Name of your Lord, the Lord of Glory and Grace
56|1|When the inevitable event comes
56|2|no soul will deny its coming
56|3|It will abase some and exalt others
56|4|When the earth is violently shaken
56|5|and the mountains crumbled
56|6|they will become like dust scattered around
56|7|On that day, you (mankind) will be divided into three groups
56|8|The people of the right hand - those whose books of records will be placed in their right hands. How happy they will be
56|9|The people of the left hand - those whose books of records will be placed in their left hands. How miserable they will be
56|10|The foremost ones (in faith and virtue) - the foremost ones in receiving their reward
56|11|(The foremost ones) will be the nearest ones to God
56|12|in the beautiful Paradise
56|13|Many of them will be from the ancient people
56|14|and only a few of them from the later generations
56|15|They will recline on jewelled couches
56|16|facing one another
56|17|Immortal youths will serve them
56|18|with goblets, jugs and cups of crystal clear wine
56|19|which will not cause them any intoxication or illness
56|20|Also, they will be served with the fruits of their choice
56|21|and the flesh of birds, as they desire
56|22|They will have maidens with large, lovely black and white eyes
56|23|like pearls preserved in their shells
56|24|as reward for their deeds
56|25|They will not hear any unnecessary or sinful talk
56|26|except each other's greetings of, "Peace be with you
56|27|As for the people of the right hand, how happy they will be
56|28|They will live amid the thornless lot trees
56|29|and banana trees
56|30|with fruits piled up one on the other
56|31|and amid the extended shade
56|32|near to flowing water
56|33|and abundant fruits
56|34|undiminished and never denied
56|35|and the noble maidens
56|36|that We have created (for the people of the right hand)
56|37|We have made them virgins
56|38|loving and of equal age
56|39|These (people of the right hand) consist of many from the ancient
56|40|and many from the later generations
56|41|As for the people on the left hand, how miserable they will be
56|42|They will live amid the scorching
56|43|scalding water and under a shadow of black smoke
56|44|neither cold nor graceful in shape
56|45|They had lived in luxury before this
56|46|and persisted in heinous sins
56|47|It was they who said, "Shall we be resurrected after we die and have turned into dust and bones
56|48|Will our ancient forefathers be resurrected too
56|49|(Muhammad), say, "All the ancient and later generations
56|50|will be brought together for an appointment on an appointed day
56|51|Then you people who had gone astray and rejected the Truth
56|52|will eat from the fruit of the tree of Zaqqum
56|53|filling your bellies, with it
56|54|and on top of this you will drink boiling water
56|55|like a thirsty camel
56|56|Such will be their dwelling on the Day of Judgment
56|57|It is We who have created you. Why then did you not testify to the Truth
56|58|Have you seen sperm
56|59|Did you create it or was it We who created it
56|60|We have destined death for you and no one can challenge Us
56|61|in replacing you with another creation like you, changing you into a form which you do not know
56|62|You certainly knew about (your) first development. Why do you not take heed
56|63|Have you seen what you sow
56|64|Do you make it grow or is it We who make it grow
56|65|Had We wanted, We could have crushed it to bits and you would have been left to lament
56|66|crying, "We have been left to suffer loss
56|67|Surely, we have been deprived (of the benefits)
56|68|Have you seen the water which you drink
56|69|Is it you who sent it down from the clouds or is it We who have sent it down
56|70|Had We wanted, We could have made it salty. Why then do you not give thanks
56|71|Have you seen the fire which you kindle
56|72|Is it you who have produced its tree or is it We who have produced it
56|73|It is We who have made it as a reminder and a means of comfort for the people
56|74|(Muhammad), glorify your Lord, the Great One
56|75|I do not need to swear by the setting of the stars
56|76|which is indeed a great oath if only you knew it
56|77|that this is an honorable Quran
56|78|preserved in a hidden Book which
56|79|no one can touch it except the purified ones
56|80|(This Quran) is a revelation from the Lord of the Universe
56|81|Would you say that this statement is a lie
56|82|Would you reject the sustenance that you receive rather than give thanks
56|83|Why can you not help a soul dying
56|84|right before your very eyes
56|85|We are closer to him than you, but you cannot see
56|86|If you are true to your claim that there is no Day of Judgment
56|87|why can you not bring it (the soul) back (to life)
56|88|(If a dying soul) is of those near to God
56|89|it will have rest, happiness, and a beautiful Paradise
56|90|If it is of the people of the right hand
56|91|it will be with the people of the right hand, living in peace and security
56|92|If it is of those who have rejected the Truth and have gone astray
56|93|its dwelling will be boiling water
56|94|and the heat of hell fire
56|95|This is the absolute Truth and certainty
56|96|So glorify the name of your Lord, the Great One
57|1|All that is in the heavens and the earth glorify God. He is Majestic and All-wise
57|2|To Him belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He gives life and causes things to die. He has power over all things
57|3|He is the First, the Last, the Manifest, and the Unseen and He knows all things
57|4|It is He who created the heavens and the earth in six days and then established His Dominion over the Throne. He knows whatever enters into the earth, what comes out of it, what descends from the sky, and what ascends to it. He is with you wherever you may be and He is Well Aware of what you do
57|5|To Him belong the heavens and the earth and to Him all things return
57|6|He causes night to enter into day and day into night. He knows best what all hearts contain
57|7|Have faith in God and His Messenger and spend for His cause out of what is entrusted to you. Those who believe and spend for the cause of God will have a great reward
57|8|If you are true indeed to this covenant, why do you not believe in God, when His Messenger invites you to believe in your Lord with whom you have made a solemn covenant
57|9|It is He who sends illustrious revelations to His servant to take you out of darkness to light. God is Compassionate and All-merciful to you
57|10|Why do you not spend for the cause of God when to Him belongs the heritage of the heavens and the earth? Those who spend for the cause of God and fight before victory will have higher positions than those who spend for the cause of God and fight after victory. However, to both parties God has promised good rewards. God is Well Aware of what you do
57|11|Whoever gives a virtuous loan to God will receive double from Him in addition to an honorable reward
57|12|On the Day of Judgment you will see the believers with their light shining in front of them and to their right. They will be told, "Paradise wherein streams flow is the glad news for you today. You will live therein forever. This is the greatest triumph
57|13|On that day the hypocrites will say to the believers, "Please look at us so that we might benefit from your light." They will be told, "Go back and search for your own light." A barrier with a door will be placed between them. Inside it there will be mercy but outside of it there will be torment
57|14|(Those outside) will call out, "Were we not with you?" (Those inside) will reply, "Yes, you were with us but you spent your life in disbelief and hypocrisy, wished death to (Muhammad), had doubts about his message and let your longings deceive you until the decree of God came to pass. The devil deceived you about the mercy of God
57|15|So on this day no ransom will be accepted from you nor from the disbelievers. Your dwelling will be fire. It will be your friend and a terrible end
57|16|Is it not time for the hearts of the believers to become humbled by the remembrance of God and by the Truth which has been revealed so that they will not be like the followers of the Bible who lived before them and whose hearts have become hard like stone through the long years. Many of them are evil doers
57|17|Know that God brings the dead earth back to life. We have explained Our revelations to you so that you may perhaps have understanding
57|18|The charitable men and women who give a virtuous loan to God will receive double from Him in addition to their honorable reward
57|19|Those who believe in God and His Messenger are the truthful ones and are witness (to the deeds of others) before their Lord. They will have their reward and their light. Those who disbelieve and reject Our revelations shall be the dwellers of hell
57|20|Know that the worldly life is only a game, a temporary attraction, a means of boastfulness among yourselves and a place for multiplying your wealth and children. It is like the rain which produces plants that are attractive to the unbelievers. These plants flourish, turn yellow, and then become crushed bits of straw. In the life hereafter there will be severe torment or forgiveness and mercy from God. The worldly life is only an illusion
57|21|Compete with one another to achieve forgiveness from your Lord and to reach Paradise, which is as vast as the heavens and the earth, and is prepared for those who believe in God and His Messenger. This is the blessing of God and He grants it to whomever He wants. The blessings of God are great
57|22|Whatever hardships you face on earth and in your souls were written in the Book before the creation of the souls. This is certainly easy for God
57|23|so that you would not grieve over what you have lost nor become too happy about what God has granted to you. God does not love the arrogant boastful ones who are niggardly and who try to make other people also niggardly
57|24|Those who turn away (from guidance) should know that God is Self-sufficient and Praiseworthy
57|25|We sent Our Messengers with clear evidence (to support their truthfulness), and sent with them the Book and the Balance so that people would maintain justice. We sent down iron - in which there is strong power and benefit for the people - so that God would know who would help Him and His Messenger without seeing the unseen. God is All-powerful and Majestic
57|26|We sent Noah and Abraham and placed prophethood and the Book among their offsprings, some of whom have the right guidance. However, most of them are evil doers
57|27|Then We sent Our other Messengers to follow their traditions. After them We sent Jesus, the son of Mary, to whom We gave the Gospel. In the hearts of his followers We placed compassion and mercy. We did not command them to lead the monastic life. This was their own method of seeking the pleasure of God. Despite this intention, they did not properly observe it (the monastic life). To the believers among them, We gave their reward but many of them are evil-doers
57|28|Believers, have fear of God and believe in His Messenger. God will grant you a double share of mercy, a light by which you can walk, and forgive your sins. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
57|29|(Have fear of God and believe in His Messenger) so that the followers of the Bible will know that they can receive no reward from God. They should know that all favors are in the hands of God. He grants them to whomever He wants. The favors of God are great
58|1|God has certainly heard the words of the woman who disputed with you about her husband and who (after not having received a favorable response from you) complained to God. God was listening to your argument. He is All-hearing and All-aware
58|2|Those who renounce their wives by calling them mothers should know that their wives could never become their mothers. Their mothers are those who have given birth to them. The words that they speak are certainly detestable and sinful. But God is Pardoning and All-forgiving
58|3|Those who renounce their wives by calling them mothers and then change their minds about what they have said will have to set free a slave as a ransom and only then will their carnal relations be lawful. This is what you have been commanded. God is Well Aware of whatever you do
58|4|If one cannot set free a slave, he must fast for two consecutive months, and only then can he have lawful carnal relations. If this is also not possible, he must feed sixty destitute people. This is the command of God, so that perhaps you will have faith in God and His Messenger. Such are the Laws of God, and those who disbelieve them will suffer a painful torment
58|5|Those who oppose God and His Messenger will be humiliated like those who lived before. We have sent illustrious revelations and those who disbelieve will suffer a humiliating torment
58|6|On the day when everyone will be resurrected, God will tell them about their deeds which He has recorded in their entirety - while they themselves have forgotten them. God is the witness over all things
58|7|Have you not considered that God knows all that is in the heavens and the earth? There is not a single place wherein any secret counsel can take place between any three people without God being the fourth, nor five people without His being the sixth nor any gathering of more or less people, wherever it may be, without His being with them. On the Day of Judgment, He will tell them about their deeds. God has the knowledge of all things
58|8|Have you not seen those who have been forbidden to have secret counsels violate this prohibition and resume their secret counsels for sinful and hostile purposes and to disobey the Messenger? When they come to you (Muhammad), they greet you with a greeting with which even God has not greeted you and say to themselves, "Why has God not punished us for what we say (if he is a true Prophet)?" The heat of hell is a sufficient torment for them. This is the most terrible fate
58|9|Believers, when you hold a secret counsel, let it not be for a sinful, hostile purpose or to disobey the Messenger, but let your counsel take place for virtuous and pious reasons. Have fear of God in whose presence you will all be brought together
58|10|Holding secret counsels for (evil purposes) is a work of satan to cause grief to the believers, but he can do no harm to them except by the will of God. Let the believers trust in God
58|11|Believers, when you are told to make room in a meeting for others, do so. God will then make room for you. When you are told to disperse, do so. God will raise the position of the believers and of those who have received knowledge. God is Well-Aware of what you do
58|12|Believers, whenever you consult the Prophet, offer charity before your consultation. This will be better for you and more pure. However, if you do not find anything to give in charity, then God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
58|13|Were you afraid that giving in charity before your consultation would make you poor? Since you did not offer such charity, God forgave you for this. At least be steadfast in prayer, pay the religious tax, and obey God and His Messenger. God is Well Aware of what you do
58|14|Have you not seen those who have established friendship with the people who are subject to the wrath of God? They do not belong to you nor you to them, yet they knowingly try to prove their point by using false oaths
58|15|God has prepared a severe torment for them. What an evil deed they have committed
58|16|They have made their oaths as a shield to obstruct others from the way of God. They will suffer a humiliating torment
58|17|Neither their wealth nor their children will be able to protect them against God. They will be the dwellers of hell fire wherein they will live forever
58|18|On the day when God will resurrect them all together, they will swear to Him as they swore to you and they will think that they have a good case but they are certainly liars
58|19|Satan has dominated them and has made them forget the guidance of God. They are Satan's party and the party of Satan will certainly suffer a great loss
58|20|Disgrace will strike those who oppose God and His Messenger
58|21|God has decreed, "I and My Messenger shall certainly triumph." God is All-powerful and Majestic
58|22|You will not find any people of faith in God and the Day of Judgment who would establish friendship with those who oppose God and His Messenger, even if it would be in the interest of their fathers, sons, brothers, and kinsmen. God has established faith in their hearts and supported them by a Spirit from Himself. He will admit them to Paradise wherein streams flow to live therein forever. God is pleased with them and they are pleased with God. These are members of the party of God and the party of God will certainly have everlasting happiness
59|1|All that is in the heavens and the earth glorify God. He is the Majestic and All-wise
59|2|It is He who drove the disbelievers among the followers of the Bible out of their homes (in the Arabian Peninsula) as the first time exiles. You did not think that they would leave their homes and they thought that their fortresses would save them from God. The decree of God came upon them in a way that even they did not expect. He caused such terror to enter their hearts that they started to destroy their own homes by their own hands and by those of the believers. People of vision, learn from this a lesson
59|3|Had God not decreed exile for them, He would have certainly punished them (in some other way). In this life and in the next life they would have suffered the torment of hell fire
59|4|This is because they opposed God and His Messenger and whoever opposes God should know that God's retribution is severe
59|5|All the productive palm-trees (of the Jews hostile to you) which you cut down or left untouched were the will of God to bring disgrace upon the evil-doers
59|6|Since you did not have to exhaust your horses and camels or (even fight), God granted to His Messenger their property. God gives authority to His Messenger over whomever He wants. God has power over all things
59|7|Whatever God grants to His Messenger (out of the property) of the people of the towns, belongs to God, the Messenger, the kinsfolk, the orphans, the destitute and to those who may become needy while on a journey, so that it will not circulate only in the hands of rich ones among them. Take only what the Messenger gives to you and desist from what he forbids you. Have fear of God; God is severe in His retribution
59|8|The poor immigrants who were deprived of their homes and property, who seek favors and pleasures from God, and help Him and His Messenger will also have (a share in the said property). These people are the truthful ones
59|9|Those who established a community center and embraced the faith before the arrival of the immigrants love those who have come to their town. They are not jealous of what is given to the immigrants. They give preference to them over themselves - even concerning the things that they themselves urgently need. Whoever controls his greed will have everlasting happiness
59|10|Those who migrated later (to Medina) say, "Lord, forgive us and our brothers who preceded us in the faith, and clear our hearts of any ill will against the believers. Lord, You are Compassionate and All-merciful
59|11|Have you not seen the hypocrites who say to their disbelieving brothers among the People of the Book, "If you are driven out, we shall, also, leave the town with you and we shall never obey whoever seeks to harm you. If you are attacked, we shall help you." God testifies that they are liars
59|12|If they were to be expelled, they would not go with them. If they were to be attacked they would not help them. Even if they were to help them, they would run away from the battle and leave them helpless
59|13|They are more afraid of you than of God. They are a people who lack understanding
59|14|They will not fight you united except with the protection of fortified towns or from behind walls. They are strong among themselves. You think that they are united, but in fact, their hearts are divided. They are a people who have no understanding
59|15|They are like those who, a short time before, suffered the consequences of their deeds. They, too, will suffer a painful torment
59|16|They are like satan who said to people, "Reject the faith," but when the people rejected the faith he said, "I have nothing to do with you. I fear the Lord of the Universe
59|17|The fate of both of them will be hell fire wherein they will live forever. Thus will be the recompense for the unjust
59|18|Believers, have fear of God. A soul must see what it has done for the future. Have fear of God for He is All-aware of what you do
59|19|Do not be like those who forget about God. He will make them forget themselves. These are the sinful people
59|20|The Companions of the Fire and the Companions of the Garden are not equal. The Companions of the Garden will achieve felicity
59|21|The people of Paradise and hell are not alike; the people of Paradise are the successful ones. Had We sent down this Quran on a mountain, you would have seen it humbled and rent asunder for fear of God. These are parables which We tell to people so that perhaps they will think
59|22|He is God, the only Lord, Who knows the unseen and the seen. He is the Beneficent and All-merciful One
59|23|He is the only Lord, the King, the Holy, the Peace, the Forgiver, the Watchful Guardian, the Majestic, the Dominant, and the Exalted. God is too exalted to have any partner
59|24|He is the Creator, the Designer, the Modeler, and to Him belong all virtuous names. All that is in the heavens and the earth glorify Him. He is All-majestic and All-wise
60|1|Believers, do not choose My enemies and your own enemies for friends, and offer them strong love. They have rejected the Truth which has come to you, and have expelled the Messenger and you from your homes because of your belief in your Lord. When you go to fight for My cause and seek My pleasure, you secretly express your love of them. I know best what you reveal or conceal. Whichever of you does this has indeed gone astray from the right path
60|2|If they find an opportunity to turn against you, they will become your enemies and will stretch out their hands and tongues at you with evil intent. They would love to see you turn away from your faith
60|3|Your relatives and children will never be of any benefit to you on the Day of Judgment. God will separate you from them. He is All-aware of what you do
60|4|Abraham and those with him are the best examples for you to follow. They told the people, "We have nothing to do with you and with those whom you worship besides God. We have rejected you. Enmity and hatred will separate us forever unless you believe in One God." Abraham told his father, "I shall ask forgiveness for you only, but I shall not be of the least help to you before God
60|5|They prayed, "Lord, we have trust in You, turned to You in repentance, and to You we shall all return. Lord, save us from the evil intentions of the disbelievers. Our Lord, forgives us. You are Majestic and All-wise
60|6|They are the best examples for those who have hope in God and the Day of Judgment. Whoever turn away should know that God is Self-sufficient and Praiseworthy
60|7|God will perhaps bring about love between you and those of the disbelievers with whom you were enemies. God is All-powerful, All-merciful, and All-forgiving
60|8|God does not forbid you to deal kindly and justly with those who have not fought against you about the religion or expelled you from your homes. God does not love the unjust people
60|9|He only forbids you to be friends with those who have fought against you about the religion, expelled you from your homes or supported others in expelling you. Whoever loves these people are unjust
60|10|Believers, when believing immigrant women come to you, test them. God knows best about their faith. If you know that they are believers, do not return them to the disbelievers. Such women are not lawful for them and disbelievers are not lawful for such women. Give the disbelievers whatever they have spent (on such women for their dowry). There is no offense for you to marry them if you agree to give them their dowry. Do not hold unto your disbelieving wives; you may get back what you have spent on them for their dowry and the disbelievers may also ask for what they have spent. This is the command of God by which He judges you. God is All-knowing and All-wise
60|11|If your wives go away from you to disbelievers who will not give you back the dowry which you spent on them, let the Muslims pay back such dowry from the property of the disbelievers which may come into their hands. Have fear of God in whom you believe
60|12|Prophet, when believing women come to you pledging not to consider anything equal to God, not to steal, or to commit fornication, not to kill their children, or to bring false charges against anyone (such as ascribing others children to their husbands), and not to disobey you in lawful matters, accept their pledge, and ask forgiveness for them from God. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
60|13|Believers, do not establish friendship with the people who have become subject to the wrath of God. They do not have any hope in the life to come, just as the disbelievers have no hope in those who are in their graves
61|1|All that is in the heavens and the earth glorify God. He is the Majestic and All-wise
61|2|Believers, why do you preach what you do not practice
61|3|It is most hateful in the sight of God if you say something and do not practice it
61|4|God loves those who fight for His cause in battlefield formations firm as an unbreakable concrete wall
61|5|Moses said to his people, "Why do you create difficulties for me when you know that I am God's Messenger to you?" When they deviated (from the right path), God led their hearts astray. God does not guide the evil-doing people
61|6|Jesus, son of Mary, said to the Israelites, "I am the Messenger of God sent to you. I confirm the Torah which is in existence and give you the glad news of the coming of a Messenger who will come after me named Ahmad." When this Messenger came to them with all the proofs (to support his truthfulness), they said, "He is simply a magician
61|7|Who is more unjust than one who creates falsehood against God when he has already been invited to Islam? God does not guide the unjust people
61|8|They want to put out the light of God with their mouths, but God will certainly make His light shine forever - even though the disbelievers may dislike this
61|9|It is He who has sent His Messenger with guidance and the true religion to stand supreme over all religions, even though the pagans may dislike it
61|10|Believers, shall I show you a bargain which will save you from the painful torment
61|11|Have faith in God and His Messenger and strive hard for His cause with your wealth and in persons. This is better for you if only you knew it
61|12|God will forgive your sins and admit you into Paradise wherein streams flow, and you live in the lofty mansions of the garden of Eden. This is indeed the greatest triumph
61|13|(Besides forgiveness) you will receive other favors which you will love: help from God and an immediate victory (Muhammad), give such glad news to the believers
61|14|Believers, be the helpers of God just as when Jesus, the son of Mary, asked the disciples, "Who will be my helpers for the cause of God?" and the disciples replied, "We are the helpers of God." A group of the Israelites believed in him and others rejected him. We helped the believers against their enemies and they became victorious
62|1|All that is in the heavens and the earth glorify God, the King, the Holy, the Majestic and the All-wise
62|2|It is He who has sent to the illiterate a Messenger from among their own people to recite to them His revelations and purify them. He will teach the Book to them
62|3|and others who have not yet joined, and He will give them wisdom. Before this they had been in plain error. God is Majestic and All-wise
62|4|Such is the favor of God which He grants to whomever He wants. God's favor is great
62|5|Those who were to carry the responsibility of the Torah but ignored, are like donkeys laden with books. How terrible is the example of the people who reject the revelations of God. God does not guide the unjust
62|6|(Muhammad), ask the Jews, "If you believe that you are the chosen people of God to the exclusion of all other people, wish for death if you are truthful
62|7|They will never wish for death because of what they have done! God knows best about the unjust people
62|8|(Muhammad), tell them, "The death from which you run away will certainly approach you. Then you will be returned to the One who knows the unseen and the seen, and He will tell you what you have done
62|9|Believers, on Friday when the call for prayer is made, try to attend prayer (remembering God) and leave off all business. This would be better for you if only you knew it
62|10|When the prayer ends, disperse through the land and seek the favor of God. Remember Him often so that perhaps you will have everlasting happiness
62|11|When they see some merchandise or some sport, they rush towards it and leave you alone standing. Say, "(God's rewards for good deeds) are better than merriment or merchandise; God is the best Sustainer
63|1|When the hypocrites come to you, they say, "We testify that you are the Messenger of God." God knows that you are His Messenger. God testifies that they hypocrites are liars
63|2|They have chosen their oaths as a shield for them to obstruct others from the way of God. How terrible is what they do
63|3|This is because they accepted the faith and then rejected it. God has sealed their hearts, thus, they do not have any understanding
63|4|Their physical appearance attracts you when you see them and when they speak, you carefully listen to them. In fact, they are like propped up hollow trunks of wood (They are so cowardly) they think that every cry which they hear is against them. They are the enemy, so beware of them. May God condemn them. Where are they turning to, leaving behind the Truth
63|5|When they are told, "Come and let the Prophet of God seek forgiveness for you," they shake their heads and you can see them arrogantly turning away
63|6|It is all the same whether you seek forgiveness for them or not; God will never forgive them. God does not guide the evil-doing people
63|7|It is they who say, "Give nothing to those who are around the Messenger of God so that they will desert him." To God belongs the treasures of the heavens and the earth, but the hypocrites have no understanding
63|8|They say, "When we return to Medina, the honorable ones will certainly drive out the mean ones." Honor belongs to God, His Messenger and the believers, but the hypocrites do not know
63|9|Believers, do not let your wealth and children divert you from remembering God. Wwhoever is diverted will suffer a great loss
63|10|Spend for the cause of God out of what We have given you before death approaches you, and say, "Lord, would that you would give me respite for a short time so that I could spend for Your cause and become one of those who do good
63|11|God will never grant respite to any soul when its appointed time has come. God is Well-Aware of what you do
64|1|All that is in the heavens and the earth glorify God. To Him belongs the Kingdom and all praise. He has power over all things
64|2|It is He who has created you all but some of you have accepted the faith and some of you have not. God is Well Aware of what you do
64|3|He has created the heavens and the earth for a genuine purpose and has formed you in the best shape. To Him all things return
64|4|He knows all that is in the heavens and the earth and all that you reveal or conceal. God knows best whatever the hearts contain
64|5|Have you not received the news about the disbelievers living before you who suffered the consequences of their deeds and will suffer a painful torment
64|6|This was because their messengers came to them with clear proof (to support their prophethood) and they said, "Can mere mortals provide us with guidance?" They rejected the Messengers and turned away. God does not need the worship of anyone. He is Self-sufficient and Praiseworthy
64|7|The disbelievers have thought that they would never be resurrected (Muhammad). Say, "I swear by my Lord that you will certainly be resurrected and will be told about all that you have done." All this is certainly very easy for God
64|8|Thus, have faith in God, His Messenger and the Light which We have revealed. God is Well-Aware of what you do
64|9|On the day when We shall gather you all together (for the Day of Judgment), all cheating will be exposed. Those who believe in God and act righteously will receive forgiveness for their sins. They will be admitted into Paradise wherein streams flow and they will live forever. This certainly is the greatest triumph
64|10|As for those who have disbelieved and rejected Our revelations, they will dwell forever in hell fire, a terrible fate
64|11|No one will be afflicted with any hardship without it being the will of God. The hearts of whoever believed in God will receive guidance. God has the knowledge of all things
64|12|Obey God and the Messenger, but if you turn away, know that the only duty of Our Messenger is to clearly preach
64|13|God is the only Lord and in Him the believers should trust
64|14|Believers, some of your wives and children may prove to be your enemies so beware of them. However, if you would pardon, ignore and forgive, know that God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
64|15|Your property and children are a trial for you, but the reward (which one may receive from God) is great
64|16|Have as much fear of God as best as you can. Listen to the Messenger, obey him, and spend for your own sake good things for the cause of God. Those who control their greed will have everlasting happiness
64|17|If you give a virtuous loan to God, He will pay back double and forgive your sins. God is the Most Appreciating and the Most Forbearing
64|18|He knows the unseen and the seen. He is the Majestic and All-wise
65|1|Prophet and believers, if you want to divorce your wives, you should divorce them at a time after which they can start their waiting period. Let them keep an account of the number of the days in the waiting period. Have fear of God, your Lord. (During their waiting period) do not expel them from their homes and they also must not go out of their homes, unless they commit proven indecency. These are the Laws of God. Whoever transgresses against the laws of God has certainly wronged himself. You never know, perhaps God will bring about some new situation
65|2|When their waiting period is about to end, keep them or separate from them lawfully. Let two just people witness the divorce and let them bear witness for the sake of God. Thus does God command those who have faith in Him and the Day of Judgment
65|3|God will make a way (out of difficulty) for one who has fear of Him and will provide him with sustenance in a way that he will not even notice. God is Sufficient for the needs of whoever trusts in Him. He has full access to whatever He wants. He has prescribed a due measure for everything
65|4|If you have any doubt whether your wives have reached the stage of menopause, the waiting period will be three months. This will also be the same for those who do not experience menstruation. The end of the waiting period for a pregnant woman is the delivery. God will make the affairs of one who fears Him easy
65|5|This is the command of God which He has revealed to you. God will expiate the evil deeds of those who fear Him and will increase their rewards
65|6|Lodge them (your wives) where you lived together if you can afford it. Do not annoy them so as to make life intolerable for them. If they are pregnant, provide them with maintenance until their delivery. Pay their wage if they breast-feed your children and settle your differences lawfully. If you are unable to settle them, let another person breast-feed the child
65|7|Let the well-to-do people spend abundantly (for the mother and the child) and let the poor spend from what God has given them. God does not impose on any soul that which he cannot afford. God will bring about ease after hardship
65|8|How many a town has disobeyed its Lord and His Messenger! For them Our questioning was strict and Our punishment severe
65|9|They suffered the consequences of their deeds and their end was perdition
65|10|God has prepared severe retribution for them. People of understanding and believers, have fear of God. God has certainly sent you a reminder
65|11|a Messenger who recites to you the illustrious revelations of God, to bring the righteously striving believers out of darkness into light. God will admit those who believe in Him and act righteously to Paradise wherein streams flow, and they will live therein forever. God will provide them with excellent sustenance
65|12|It is God who has created the seven heavens and a like number of earths. His commandments are sent between them, so that you would know that God has power over all things and that His knowledge encompasses all
66|1|Prophet, in seeking the pleasure of your wives, why do you make unlawful that which God has made lawful. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
66|2|God has shown you how to absolve yourselves of your oaths. He is your Guardian and is All-knowing and All-wise
66|3|The Prophet told a secret to one of his wives telling her not to mention it to anyone else. When she divulged it, God informed His Prophet about this. The Prophet told his wife part of the information which he had received from God and ignored the rest. Then she asked, "Who informed you about this?" He replied, "The All-aware and All-knowing one has told me
66|4|Would that you two (wives of the Prophet) had turned to God in repentance. Your hearts have sinned. If you conspire with each other against him, know that God is his Guardian. Gabriel, the righteous (ones) among the believers and the angels will all support him
66|5|If he divorces you, perhaps his Lord will replace you with better wives, either widows or virgins who will be Muslims: believers, faithful, obedient, repentant, and devout in prayer and fasting
66|6|Believers, save yourselves and your families from the fire which is fueled by people and stones and is guarded by stern angels who do not disobey God's commands and do whatever they are ordered to do
66|7|Disbelievers (will be told on the Day of Judgment), "Do not make any excuses on this day; you are only receiving recompense for what you have done
66|8|Believers, turn to God in repentance with the intention of never repeating the same sin. Perhaps your Lord will expiate your evil deeds and admit you to Paradise wherein streams flow. On the Day of Judgment, God will not disgrace the Prophet and those who have believed in him. Their lights will shine in front of them and to their right. They will say, "Our Lord, perfect our light for us and forgive our sins. You have power over all things
66|9|Prophet, fight against the disbelievers and the hypocrites and be stern against them. Their dwelling will be hell fire, the most terrible fate
66|10|God has told the disbelievers the story of the wives of Noah and Lot as a parable. They were married to two of Our righteous servants but were unfaithful to them. Nothing could protect them from the (wrath) of God and they were told to enter hell fire with the others
66|11|To the believers, as a parable, God has told the story of the wife of the Pharaoh who said, "Lord, establish for me a house in Paradise in your presence. Rescue me from Pharaoh and his deeds and save me from the unjust people
66|12|He has also told, as a parable, the story of Mary, daughter of Imran who preserved her virginity and (into whose womb) We breathed Our spirit. She made the words of her Lord and the predictions in His Books come true. She was an obedient woman
67|1|Blessed is He in whose hands is the Kingdom and who has power over all things
67|2|It is He who has created death and life to put you to the test and see which of you is most virtuous in your deeds. He is Majestic and All-forgiving
67|3|It is He who has created seven heavens, one above the other. You can see no flaw in the creation of the Beneficent God. Look again. Can you see faults
67|4|Look twice (and keep on looking), your eyes will only become dull and tired
67|5|We have decked the lowest heavens with torches. With these torches We have stoned the devils and We have prepared for them the torment of hell
67|6|For those who have disbelieved in their Lord, We have prepared the torment of hell, the most terrible place to return
67|7|When they are thrown into hell, they will hear its roaring while it boils
67|8|It almost explodes in rage. Whenever a group is thrown into it, its keepers will ask them, "Did no one come to warn you
67|9|They will say, "Yes, someone did come to warn us, but we rejected him saying, 'God has revealed nothing. You are in great error
67|10|They will also say, "Had We listened or used our minds, we would not have become the dwellers of hell
67|11|They will confess to their sins, but the dwellers of hell will be far away from God's (mercy)
67|12|Those who fear their Lord in secret will receive forgiveness and a great reward
67|13|Whether you conceal what you say or reveal it, God knows best all that the hearts contain
67|14|Does the One Who is Subtle, All-aware, and Who created all things not know all about them
67|15|It is He who has made the earth subservient to you. You walk through its vast valleys and eat of its sustenance. Before Him you will all be resurrected
67|16|Do you feel secure that the One in the heavens will not cause you to sink into the earth when it is violently shaking
67|17|Do you feel secure that the One in the heavens will not strike you with a sandstorm? You will soon know, with the coming of the torment, how serious Our warning was
67|18|Those who lived before them had also rejected Our warning, and how terrible was Our retribution
67|19|Did they not see the birds above them, stretching out, and flapping their wings. No one keeps them up in the sky except the Beneficent God. He certainly watches over all things
67|20|Do you have any armies who will help you against the Beneficent God? The disbelievers are certainly deceived (by satan)
67|21|Is there anyone who will provide you with sustenance if God were to deny you sustenance? In fact, they obstinately persist in their transgression and hatred
67|22|Can one who walks with his head hanging down be better guided that one who walks with his head upright
67|23|(Muhammad), say, "It is God who has brought you into being and made ears, eyes, and hearts for you, but you give very little thanks
67|24|Say, "It is God who has settled you on the earth and to Him you will be resurrected
67|25|They say, "When will this torment take place if what you say is true
67|26|Say, "God knows best. I am only one who gives warning
67|27|When they see the torment approaching, the faces of the disbelievers will blacken and they will be told, "This is what you wanted to (experience)
67|28|(Muhammad), say, "Have you not considered that regardless whether God forgives me and my followers or grants us mercy, but who will protect the disbelievers from a painful torment
67|29|Say, "He is the Beneficent One in whom we have faith and trust. You will soon know who is in manifest error
67|30|Say, "Have you not thought that if your water was to dry up, who would bring you water from the spring
68|1|Nun. By the pen and by what you write
68|2|(Muhammad), you are not insane, thanks to the bounty of your Lord
68|3|You will certainly receive a never-ending reward
68|4|You have attained a high moral standard
68|5|You will see and they will also see
68|6|which of you has been afflicted by insanity
68|7|Your Lord knows best who has gone astray from His path and who is rightly guided
68|8|Do not yield to those who reject the Truth
68|9|They would like you to relent to them so that they could also relent towards you
68|10|Do not yield to one persistent in swearing
68|11|back-biting, gossiping
68|12|obstructing virtues, a sinful transgressor
68|13|ill-mannered, and moraly corrupt or that because he may possess wealth and children
68|14|When Our revelations are recited to him
68|15|he says, "These are ancient legends
68|16|We shall brand him on his nose
68|17|We have tested them in the same way as we tested the dwellers of the garden (in Yemen) when they swore to pluck all the fruits of the garden in the morning
68|18|without adding ("if God wills)
68|19|A visitor from your Lord circled around the garden during the night while they were asleep
68|20|and the garden was turned into a barren desert
68|21|In the morning they called out to one another
68|22|Go early to your farms, if you want to pluck the fruits
68|23|They all left, whispering to one another
68|24|Let no beggar come to the garden
68|25|They were resolved to repel the beggars
68|26|When they saw the garden, they said, "Surely we have lost our way
68|27|(No, we are not lost.) In fact, we have been deprived of everything
68|28|A reasonable one among them said, "Did I not tell you that you should glorify God
68|29|They said, "All glory belongs to God. We have certainly been unjust
68|30|Some of them started to blame others
68|31|They said, "Woe to us. We have been arrogant
68|32|Perhaps our Lord will replace it with a better garden. We turn in repentance to our Lord
68|33|Such is the torment if only they knew that the torment in the life hereafter will certainly be greater
68|34|The pious ones will receive a beautiful Paradise from their Lord
68|35|Shall We treat the Muslims like criminals
68|36|What is the matter with you? How could you judge this to be so
68|37|Do you have a book from which you study
68|38|that tells you to do whatever you want
68|39|Do you have a covenant with Us which allows you to do whatever you want until the Day of Judgment
68|40|(Muhammad), ask which of them can guarantee that on the Day of Judgment
68|41|they will receive the same thing that the Muslims will? Do they have any witness to such an agreement? Let them bring out such witness, if they are truthful
68|42|On the day when the terrible torment approaches, they will be told (in a mocking way) to prostrate themselves, but they will not be able to do it
68|43|Their eyes will be lowered and disgrace will cover them. They had certainly been told to prostrate themselves before God when they were safe and sound
68|44|Leave those who reject the Quran to Me and I shall lead them step by step to destruction, without their being aware of it
68|45|I shall give them respite, however, My plan is so strong that they will never be able to escape from it
68|46|(Muhammad), do you ask for your preaching any recompense which is too heavy a price for them to pay
68|47|Do they possess the knowledge of the unseen which confirms the truthfulness of their belief
68|48|Exercise patience until the promise of your Lord (to punish the unbelievers) comes true. Do not be like Jonah (who left his people without the permission of God; he wanted them to be punished immediately)
68|49|and who cried (for help) to his Lord, while imprisoned and helpless inside the fish. Had it not been for a favor from his Lord, he would have been left out in the open, deserving blame for his shortcomings
68|50|But his Lord chose him as His Prophet and made him one of the righteous ones
68|51|When the disbelievers listen to you reciting the Quran they almost try to destroy you with their piercing eyes. Then they say, "He is certainly insane
68|52|The Quran is nothing but a reminder from God to mankind
69|1|The Inevitable! (Day of Judgment)
69|2|What is the Inevitable
69|3|Would that you knew (in detail) what the Inevitable is
69|4|The people of Thamud and Ad denied the Day of Judgment
69|5|The Thamuds were destroyed by a violent blast of sound
69|6|The Ads were destroyed by a swift, destructive gale
69|7|which continued to strike them for seven and eight days so that eventually you could see the people lying dead like the hollow trunks of uprooted palm-trees
69|8|Can you see any of their survivors
69|9|The Pharaoh, those who lived before him and the people of the Subverted Cities all persisted in doing evil
69|10|They disobeyed the Messenger of their Lord and He seized them with torment which increased with time
69|11|When the flood rose high and covered the whole land, We carried you in the Ark
69|12|as a lesson for you, but only attentive ears will retain it
69|13|With the first blast of sound from the trumpet
69|14|the earth and mountains will be raised up high and crushed all together
69|15|On that day, the inevitable event will take place
69|16|and the heavens will be rent asunder
69|17|and will turn frail, losing all force. The angels will be around the heavens and on that day eight of them will carry the Throne of your Lord above all the creatures
69|18|On that day all your secrets will be exposed
69|19|Those who will receive the books of the records of their deeds in their right hands will say, "Come and read my record
69|20|I was sure that the record of my deeds would be shown to me
69|21|They will have a pleasant life
69|22|in an exalted garden
69|23|with fruits within easy reach
69|24|Such people will be told, "Eat and drink with pleasure as the reward for what you did in the past
69|25|However, those who will receive the books of the records of their deeds in their left hands will say, "We wish that this record had never been given to us
69|26|and that we would never knew what our records contained
69|27|Would that death had taken us away for good
69|28|Our wealth is of no benefit to us
69|29|and our belief has destroyed us
69|30|The angels will be told, "Seize and chain them
69|31|then throw them into hell to be heated up therein
69|32|Fasten a chain to them - seventy cubits long
69|33|they did not believe in the great God
69|34|nor were they concerned with feeding the destitute
69|35|On this day, they will have no friends
69|36|and no food except pus
69|37|which only the sinners eat
69|38|I do not need to swear by what you see
69|39|and what you do not see
69|40|because the Quran is certainly the word of a reverent messenger
69|41|It is not the word of a poet but only a few of you have faith
69|42|nor is it the work of a soothsayer but only a few of you take heed
69|43|It is a revelation from the Lord of the Universe
69|44|Had Muhammad invented some words against Us
69|45|We would have caught hold of him by his right hand
69|46|and cut-off his main artery
69|47|None of you would be able to prevent Us from doing this to him
69|48|The Quran is certainly a reminder for the pious ones
69|49|We certainly know that some of you have rejected it
69|50|and (on the Day of Judgment) this will be a great source of regret for the unbelievers
69|51|This is the Truth beyond any doubt
69|52|(Muhammad), glorify the name of your Lord, the Great One
70|1|Someone has (needlessly) demanded to experience the torment (of God)
70|2|which will inevitably seize the disbelievers
70|3|No one can defend him against God, the Lord of the exalted positions
70|4|On that Day (of Judgment), long as fifty thousand years, the angels and the Spirit will ascend to Him
70|5|(Muhammad), exercise patience with no complaints
70|6|They think that it (the Day of Judgment) is far away
70|7|but We see it to be very near
70|8|On the day when the heavens become like molten metal
70|9|and the mountains become like wool
70|10|even intimate friends will not inquire about their friends
70|11|though they may see each other. A sinner will wish that he could save himself from the torment of that day by sacrificing his children
70|12|his wife, his brother
70|13|his kinsmen who gave him refuge (from hardship)
70|14|and all those on earth
70|15|By no means! For the raging flames of the fire
70|16|will strip-off the flesh
70|17|and drag into it anyone who has turned away (from obeying God)
70|18|and who accumulated wealth without spending it for a good purpose
70|19|Human beings are created greedy
70|20|When they are afflicted, they complain
70|21|but when they are fortunate, they become niggardly
70|22|except those who are steadfast
70|23|and constant in their prayers
70|24|They are those who assign a certain share of their property
70|25|for the needy and the deprived
70|26|who acknowledge the Day of Judgment
70|27|who are afraid of the torment of their Lord
70|28|the punishment of their Lord is not something for them to feel secure of
70|29|who guard their carnal desires
70|30|except from their wives and slave girls, in which case they are not to be blamed
70|31|but whoever goes beyond this is a transgressor
70|32|who honor their trust and promises
70|33|who testify to what they have witnessed
70|34|and (finally) those who do not miss their ritual - prayers at the prescribed times
70|35|such people will receive due honor in Paradise
70|36|What is wrong with the disbelievers who roam around you (Muhammad)
70|37|left and right, in numerous groups
70|38|Does every one of them desire to enter the bountiful Paradise
70|39|By no means! For they know very well out of what We have created them (The human being's naturally growing from a living germ, without discipline and good deeds will not result in virtue)
70|40|I do not need to swear by the Lord of the eastern and western regions that We have certainly all the power
70|41|to replace them by a better people and none can challenge Our power
70|42|(Muhammad), leave them alone to dispute and play until they face the Day with which they have been threatened
70|43|the Day when they rush out of their graves as if racing towards a signpost
70|44|with their eyes cast down and covered by disgrace; the day about which they were promised
71|1|We sent Noah to his people telling him, "Warn your people before a painful torment approaches them
71|2|Noah said, "My people, I am warning you plainly
71|3|Worship God, have fear of Him and obey me
71|4|He will forgive your sins and give you a respite for an appointed time. When the time which God has appointed arrives, none will be able to postpone it. Would that you knew this
71|5|Noah said, "My Lord, I have been preaching to my people, night and day
71|6|but it has had no effect on them except to make them run away
71|7|Evert time I invite them to Your (guidance) so that You can forgive them, they put their fingers into their ears, cover their heads with their clothes, persist in their disbelief and display extreme arrogance
71|8|I preached to them aloud, in public
71|9|Then I conveyed the message to them, again, both in public and in private
71|10|and told them, "Ask forgiveness from your Lord; He is All-forgiving
71|11|He will send you abundant
71|12|rain from the sky
71|13|strengthen you by (providing) you wealth and children, and make gardens and streams for you. What is the matter with you that you are not afraid of the greatness of God
71|14|who has created you in several stages
71|15|Have you not seen that God has created the seven heavens one above the other
71|16|and placed therein the moon as a light
71|17|and the sun as a torch
71|18|God made you grow from the earth. He will make you return to it and then take you out of it again
71|19|God has spread out the earth
71|20|for you, so that you may walk along its wide roads
71|21|Noah said, "Lord, they have disobeyed me and followed those whose wealth and children will only bring about destruction for them
71|22|They have arrogantly plotted evil plans against me
71|23|and have said to each other, 'Do not give-up your idols. Do not renounce Wadd, Suwa`, Yaghuth, Ya`uq and Nasr (names of certain idols)
71|24|They have misled many and the unjust will achieve nothing but more error
71|25|Because of their sins, they were drowned and made to enter hell. They could find no one to help them besides God
71|26|Noah said, "Lord, do not leave a single disbeliever on earth
71|27|if You do, they will mislead Your servants and will only give birth to ungrateful sinners
71|28|Lord, forgive me, my parents, the believers who have entered my home and all believing men and women. Give nothing to the unjust but destruction
72|1|(Muhammad), say, "It has been revealed to me that a party of jinn has listened (to the recitation) of the Quran and has told (their people), "We heard an amazing reading
72|2|which guides people to the right path and we believe in it. We shall never consider anyone equal to our Lord
72|3|our Lord is too exalted to have either a wife or son
72|4|The dimwit one (the devil) among us has been telling confused lies about God
72|5|We thought that no man or jinn could ever tell lies about God
72|6|Certain human beings sought refuge with certain jinn and this increased the rebelliousness of those jinn
72|7|Those people thought, like you, that God would never send down a Messenger
72|8|We went near the heavens but found it to be full of strong guards and shooting flames
72|9|We used to sit near by and try to listen to the heavens, but shooting flames now await those who try to do that
72|10|We do not know whether by this arrangement God intends benefit and guidance for the people of the earth or only evil
72|11|As for us, some of us are righteous and others are not. We have all followed different ways
72|12|We knew that we could never challenge God whether we stayed on earth or fled elsewhere
72|13|Now that we have listened to the guidance, we believe in it. Whoever believes in his Lord does not need to fear loss or oppression
72|14|Some of us are Muslims and some of us have deviated from the Truth. Whoever has embraced Islam has followed the right guidance
72|15|However, the deviators from the Truth will be the fuel for hell
72|16|Had they (jinn and mankind) remained steadfast in their religion (Islam), We would certainly have given them abundant water to drink
72|17|as a trial for them. God will make those who disregard the guidance from their Lord suffer increasing torment
72|18|All the parts of the body to be placed on the ground during prostration belong to God
72|19|Do not prostrate before anyone other than Him. When the servant of God (Muhammad) preached (his message) the jinn would all crowd around him
72|20|(Muhammad), say, "I worship only my Lord and do not consider anyone equal to Him
72|21|Say, "I do not possess any power to harm or benefit you
72|22|Say, "No one can protect me from God, nor can I find any place of refuge but with him
72|23|My only (means of protection) is to convey the message of God. Whoever disobeys God and His Messenger will go to hell, wherein he will live forever
72|24|(On the Day of Judgment) when the disbelievers witness that with which they have been threatened, they will then know whose helpers are weaker and fewer in number
72|25|(Muhammad), say, "I do not know whether that with which you have been threatened is close by or whether my Lord will prolong the time of its coming
72|26|He knows the unseen and He does not allow anyone to know His secrets except those of His Messengers whom He chooses
72|27|He causes angelic guards to march before and after him
72|28|(Messenger) so that He would know that the Messengers have conveyed the message of their Lord. He encompasses all that is with them and He keeps a precise account of all things
73|1|You, who have wrapped yourself up with a mantle
73|2|worship (God) for a few hours at night
73|3|(Worship Him) for more or less than half of the night
73|4|and recite the Quran in a distinct tone
73|5|We are about to reveal to you a mighty word
73|6|Prayer at night leaves the strongest impression on one's soul and the words spoken are more consistent
73|7|During the day, you are preoccupied with many activities
73|8|Glorify the Name of your Lord, the Lord of the eastern and western regions, with due sincerity
73|9|He is the only Lord, so choose Him as your guardian
73|10|Bear patiently whatever they say, do not yield to them and keep on preaching decently to them
73|11|Leave the prosperous disbelievers to Me and give them respite for a little while
73|12|We have prepared for them fetters, flaming fire
73|13|food which chokes (them), and a painful torment
73|14|On that day, the earth and the mountains will be violently shaken, and the mountains will be turned into heaps of moving sand
73|15|We have sent you a Messenger, who will witness your deeds, just as We sent a Messenger to the Pharaoh
73|16|However, the Pharaoh disobeyed the Messenger and We seized him with a severe retribution
73|17|If you, disbelieve, how will you be able to protect yourselves from the hardships of the day which would even turn children grey-headed
73|18|On that day, the heavens will be rent asunder. This is the decree of God which has already been ordained
73|19|This is a reminder. Let anyone who wants, seek guidance from his Lord
73|20|Your Lord knows that you and a group of those who are with you get up for prayer sometimes for less than two-thirds of the night, sometimes half and sometimes one-third of it. God determines the duration of the night and day. He knew that it would be hard for you to keep an exact account of the timing of the night prayers, so He turned to you with forgiveness. Thus, recite from the Quran as much as possible. He knew that some of you would be sick, others would travel in the land to seek God's favors, and still others would fight for the cause of God. Thus, recite from the Quran as much as possible, be steadfast in prayer, pay the zakat, and give virtuous loans to God. Whatever good deeds you save for the next life, you will certainly find them with God. This is the best investment, and for this you will find the greatest reward. Ask forgiveness from God. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful
74|1|Cloaked one
74|2|stand up, deliver your warning
74|3|proclaim the greatness of your Lord
74|4|cleanse your clothes
74|5|stay away from sins
74|6|and do not think that by doing such deeds, you have done a great favor to God
74|7|Exercise patience to please your Lord
74|8|When the trumpet is sounded
74|9|it will be a hard day
74|10|and for the disbelievers, in particular, it will not be at all easy
74|11|Leave to Me the one, whom I have created all by Myself
74|12|and whom I have granted abundant wealth
74|13|and children living in his presence
74|14|whose life I have made run smoothly
74|15|and who still desires more
74|16|Never will he receive more. He has been hostile to Our revelations
74|17|We shall make him suffer the torment of hell without relief
74|18|He planned and plotted
74|19|May he be condemned
74|20|What an evil plan he has made
74|21|May he be condemned again for his schemes! He looked around
74|22|frowned and scowled
74|23|then turned back, and swelling-up with pride
74|24|said, "This (the Quran) is nothing but magic, inherited from ancient magicians
74|25|These are only words from a mere mortal
74|26|I shall make him suffer the torment of hell
74|27|Would that you really knew what hell is
74|28|It leaves and spares no one and nothing
74|29|It scorches people's skin
74|30|and it has nineteen angelic keepers
74|31|We have made only angels as the keepers of the fire (for they are the strongest in carrying out Our commands). Our informing (people) of the numbers of these angels is a trial for the disbelievers. It gives more certainty to the people of the Book and strengthens the faith of the believers. The people of the Book and the believers have no doubt about it. We have fixed the number to make the disbelievers and those whose hearts are sick say, "What does God mean by such a parable?" Thus, God guides and causes to go astray whomever He wants. No one knows about the army of your Lord except He Himself. This parable is a reminder for mankind
74|32|By the moon
74|33|by the retreating night
74|34|by the brightening dawn
74|35|hell is certainly the greatest calamity
74|36|It is a warning for mankind
74|37|whether one steps forward to embrace the faith or one turns away from it
74|38|Every soul will be in captivity for its deeds
74|39|except the people of the right hand
74|40|who will be in Paradise
74|41|and will ask of the criminals
74|42|what led you into hell
74|43|They will reply, "We did not pray
74|44|nor did we feed the destitute
74|45|We indulged and persisted in useless disputes
74|46|and rejected the Day of Judgment
74|47|until death approached us
74|48|The intercession of the intercessors will be of no benefit to them
74|49|If such will be the Day of Judgment, what is the matter with them? Why do they run away from guidance
74|50|like frightened donkeys
74|51|running away from a lion
74|52|Is it that everyone of them wants to receive a heavenly book addressed to him personally
74|53|This will certainly never be the case! In fact, they are not afraid of the Day of Judgment
74|54|There is no doubt that the Quran is a guide
74|55|Let anyone who seeks guidance do so
74|56|No one will seek guidance unless God wills it. He alone is worthy of being feared and He is the Source of Forgiveness
75|1|I swear by the Day of Resurrection
75|2|and by the self accusing soul (that you will certainly be resurrected)
75|3|Do men think that We shall never be able to assemble their bones
75|4|We certainly have the power to restore them even the very tips of their finger
75|5|In fact, people want to have eternal life in this world
75|6|He asks, "When will be the Day of Judgment
75|7|When the eye is bewildered
75|8|the moon eclipsed
75|9|and the sun and the moon are brought together
75|10|people will say, "Is there anywhere to run away
75|11|Certainly not! There will be no place of refuge
75|12|The only place of refuge will be with God
75|13|On that day, people will be informed of all that they had done and all that they were supposed to do
75|14|In fact, people are well-aware of their own soul
75|15|even though they make excuses
75|16|(Muhammad), do not move your tongue too quickly to recite the Quran
75|17|We shall be responsible for its collection and its recitation
75|18|When We recite it, follow its recitation (by Us)
75|19|We shall be responsible for its explanation
75|20|Human beings certainly do not want to pay much attention to the Quran. In fact, they love the worldly life
75|21|and neglect the life to come
75|22|On the Day of Judgment some faces will be bright
75|23|and look forward to receiving mercy from their Lord
75|24|Others will be despondent
75|25|certain of facing a great calamity
75|26|Some people, certainly, do not believe in it, but when a person's soul reaches up to his throat
75|27|and the angels say, "Who will take away his soul
75|28|(the angels of mercy or the angels of wrath,)" then, he will realize that it is time to leave this world
75|29|When legs are twisted around each other
75|30|that will be the time to be driven to one's Lord
75|31|The human being does not want to believe the Truth, nor does he want to pray
75|32|He rejects the faith, turns away
75|33|and haughtily goes to his people
75|34|Woe to you
75|35|Woe to you
75|36|For you, the human being of such behavior, will certainly deserve it
75|37|Does the human being think that he will be left uncontrolled
75|38|Was he not once just a drop of discharged sperm
75|39|Was he not turned into a clot of blood? God then formed him and gave him proper shape. From the human being, God made males and females in pairs
75|40|Does He then not have the power to bring the dead back to life
76|1|There was certainly a time when there was no mention of the human being
76|2|We created the human being from the union of sperm and egg to test him. We gave him hearing and vision
76|3|We showed him the right path whether he would be grateful or ungrateful
76|4|We have prepared chains, shackles, and flaming fire (for the disbelievers)
76|5|The virtuous ones will drink from a cup containing camphor
76|6|which flows from a spring from which the servants of God will drink
76|7|The servants of God fulfill their vows and are afraid of the day in which there will be widespread terror
76|8|They feed the destitute, orphans, and captives for the love of God, saying
76|9|We only feed you for the sake of God and we do not want any reward or thanks from you
76|10|We are afraid of our Lord and the bitterly distressful day
76|11|God will certainly rescue them from the terror of that day and will meet them with joy and pleasure
76|12|For their patience, He will reward them with Paradise and silk
76|13|They will recline therein on couches and they will find neither excessive heat nor cold
76|14|The shades of the garden will be closely spread over them and it will be easy for them to reach the fruits
76|15|They will be served with silver dishes and crystal clear goblets
76|16|Also there will be crystal clear goblets of silver containing the exact measure of drink which they desire
76|17|They will drink cups containing (soft flowing) sparkling water
76|18|from a spring named salsabil
76|19|They will be served by immortal youths who look like scattered pearls
76|20|If you were to see it, you would find it to be a great kingdom with great bounty
76|21|They will have fine green silk and brocade, and they will be decked with bracelets of silver. Their Lord will provide them with a drink of pure wine
76|22|This will be their reward and their efforts will be appreciated
76|23|(Muhammad), We have revealed the Quran to you in gradual steps
76|24|So wait patiently for the command of your Lord and do not yield to any sinful or disbelieving person among them (people)
76|25|Mention the Name of your Lord, mornings and evenings
76|26|Prostrate before Him and glorify Him extensively during the night
76|27|These people (disbelievers) love the worldly life and neglect the terrifying day which will come
76|28|We have created them and have given them strength. Had We wanted, We could have replaced them with another people like them
76|29|This chapter is a reminder. Let those who want, seek guidance from their Lord
76|30|(The virtuous mentioned in this chapter) want only what God wants. God is All-knowing and All-wise
76|31|He admits to His mercy whomever He wants. For the unjust He has prepared a painful punishment
77|1|By (the angels) sent forth with the commands of God
77|2|by (the angels) as swift as blowing winds
77|3|by (the angels) spreading (the words of God) far and wide
77|4|by (the angels) who make a clear distinction between right and wrong
77|5|and by those who reveal revelations (to the prophets)
77|6|to provide excuses for some and to give warnings to others
77|7|that whatever with which you have been warned will inevitably come to pass
77|8|Then the stars will lose their light
77|9|Heavens will rent asunder
77|10|The mountains will be blown away as dust
77|11|The Messengers will receive their appointments
77|12|If one asks, "To which day have such calamitous events been postponed
77|13|one will be told,"To the Day of Distinction
77|14|Would that you knew about the Day of Judgment
77|15|On that day, woe will be to those who have rejected God's revelations
77|16|Did We not destroy the ancient people
77|17|and make others settle after them in their land
77|18|Thus do We deal with the sinful ones
77|19|On that day, woe upon those who have rejected God's revelations
77|20|Did We not create you from an insignificant drop of fluid
77|21|and place it in a secure place
77|22|for an appointed time
77|23|Thus did We Plan and how excellent is Our planning
77|24|On that day, woe would be upon those who have rejected the revelations of God
77|25|Did We not make the earth as a gathering place
77|26|for the living and the dead
77|27|place on it high mountains and provide you with fresh water
77|28|On that Day (of Judgment) woe would be upon those who have rejected God's revelations
77|29|Proceed to that (the Day of Judgment) which you have rejected
77|30|Proceed to that shadow, rising in three columns
77|31|which neither gives shade nor protects one from the flames
77|32|The fire will shoot out sparks as big as huge towers
77|33|and yellow camels
77|34|On that day, woe would be upon those who have rejected God's revelations
77|35|On that day they will not be able to speak
77|36|nor will they be permitted to offer any excuses
77|37|On that day, woe would be those who have rejected God's revelations
77|38|That is the Day of Judgment. We will bring you together with all the ancient peoples
77|39|If you have any plans, use them
77|40|On that day, woe would be upon those who have rejected God's revelations
77|41|The pious ones will rest amid the shade, springs
77|42|and fruits of the kind which they desire
77|43|(They will be told), "Eat and drink in good health as a reward for what you have done
77|44|Thus do We reward the righteous ones
77|45|On that day, woe would be upon those who have rejected God's revelations
77|46|(Disbelievers), eat and enjoy yourselves for a little while. You are certainly sinful ones
77|47|On that day, woe would be upon those who have rejected God's revelations
77|48|When they are told to say their prayers, they do not bow down (in prayer)
77|49|On that day, woe would be upon those who have rejected God's revelations
77|50|In which word other than the Quran will they believe
78|1|What do they quarrel about
78|2|They quarrel about the great news
78|3|concerning which they have disputes
78|4|(What they think is certainly despicable!). They will soon come to know (the reality)
78|5|Yes, indeed, before long they will learn all about it
78|6|Have We not made the earth as a place to rest
78|7|and the mountains as pegs (to anchor the earth)
78|8|Have We not created you in pairs
78|9|made sleep for you to rest
78|10|made the night as a covering
78|11|and the day as time for you to make a living
78|12|Have We not made seven strong heavens above you
78|13|(the sun) as a shining torch
78|14|and sent down heavy rains from the clouds
78|15|to make the seeds, plants
78|16|and thick gardens grow
78|17|The Day of Judgment will certainly be the final appointment
78|18|On that day the trumpet will be sounded and you will come (to Us) in huge groups
78|19|The heavens will have openings like doors
78|20|The mountains will be driven away and become like mirages
78|21|Hell will lie in wait (for its prey)
78|22|It will be a place of return
78|23|for the rebellious ones and they will live therein for ages
78|24|They will not feel cold nor taste any drink
78|25|except boiling water and pus
78|26|as a fitting recompense for their deeds
78|27|They did not expect such a Judgment
78|28|and persistently rejected Our revelations
78|29|However, We have recorded everything in a book
78|30|(They will be told), "Suffer, We shall only increase the torment for you
78|31|The pious ones will be triumphant
78|32|They will have gardens and vineyards
78|33|maidens with pears-shaped breasts who are of equal age (to their spouses)
78|34|and cups full of wine
78|35|They will not hear therein any unnecessary words or lies
78|36|This will be their reward from your Lord, a favor from Him and a recompense for their deeds
78|37|He is the Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them. He is the Beneficent God and no one will be able to address Him
78|38|On that day, the Spirit and the angels who stand in lines will not speak except those whom the Beneficent God has permitted, and he will speak the right words
78|39|That will be the Day of the Truth. So let those who want seek refuge from their Lord
78|40|We have warned you of the approaching torment. On that day, a person will see what his hands have committed. A disbeliever will say, "Would that I had been dust
79|1|By the angels who violently tear-out the souls of the disbelievers from their bodies
79|2|by the angels who gently release the souls of the believers
79|3|by the angels who float (in the heavens by the will of God)
79|4|by the angels who hasten along
79|5|and by the angels who regulate the affairs, (you will certainly be resurrected)
79|6|On the day when the first trumpet sound blasts
79|7|and will be followed by the second one
79|8|hearts will undergo terrible trembling
79|9|and eyes will be humbly cast down
79|10|(The disbelievers) say, "Shall we be brought back to life again
79|11|after we have become bones and dust
79|12|They have said, "Such a resurrection will certainly be a great loss
79|13|However, it will only take a single blast
79|14|to bring them out of their graves and back to life on the earth's surface
79|15|(Muhammad), have you heard the story of Moses
79|16|when his Lord called him in the holy valley of Tuwa
79|17|saying, "Go to the Pharaoh. He has transgressed beyond all bounds
79|18|And say to him, "Would you like to reform yourself
79|19|I shall guide you to your Lord so that you may perhaps have fear of Him
79|20|Moses showed him the great miracle
79|21|but the Pharaoh rejected it and disobeyed (Moses)
79|22|Then he turned away in a hurry
79|23|and gathered his people together
79|24|saying, "I am your supreme lord
79|25|So God struck him with the torment of this life and the life hereafter
79|26|In this there is a lesson for those who have fear of God
79|27|(People), is your creation harder for God than that of the heavens, which He created, raised and established
79|28|high above
79|29|He has made its nights dark and its days bright
79|30|After this, He spread out the earth
79|31|produced water and grass therefrom
79|32|then set-up firmly the mountains
79|33|All this was done as a means of enjoyment for you and your cattle
79|34|On the day when the great calamity comes
79|35|the human being will recall whatever he has done
79|36|Hell fire will become visible for those who would see it
79|37|Those who have rebelled
79|38|and preferred the worldly life
79|39|hell will be their dwelling
79|40|However, those who had feared their Lord and restrained their souls from acting according to its desires
79|41|Paradise will be the dwelling
79|42|(Muhammad), they ask you, "When will the Hour of Doom come
79|43|(Muhammad), you do not know (when and how) it will come
79|44|This matter is in the hands of your Lord
79|45|You are only a warner for those who fear such a day
79|46|On the day when they see it, it will seem to them as though they had only lived in the world for a morning and an afternoon
80|1|He frowned and then turned away
80|2|from a blind man who had come up to him
80|3|You never know. Perhaps he wanted to purify himself
80|4|or receive some (Quranic) advice which would benefit him
80|5|Yet you pay attention
80|6|to a rich man
80|7|though you will not be questioned even if he never purifies himself
80|8|As for the one who comes to you earnestly (striving for guidance)
80|9|and who has fear of God
80|10|you ignore him
80|11|These verses are a reminder
80|12|so let those who want to follow its guidance do so
80|13|(This Quran) is also recorded in honorable books
80|14|exalted, purified
80|15|by the hands of the noble, virtuous
80|16|and angelic scribes
80|17|May (the disbelieving) human being be condemned! What makes him disbelieve
80|18|From what has God created him
80|19|He created him from a living germ. He determined his fate
80|20|and made the path of guidance easy for him to follow
80|21|Then He caused him to die and be buried
80|22|and He will resurrect him whenever He wants
80|23|Certainly, he has not duly fulfilled His commands
80|24|Let the human being think about (how We produce) his food
80|25|We send down abundant water
80|26|and let the earth to break open
80|27|to yield therein corn
80|28|grapes, vegetables
80|29|olives, dates
80|30|thickly planted gardens
80|31|fruits, and grass
80|32|(These are made so as to be) means of enjoyment for you and your cattle
80|33|When the trumpet sounds
80|34|it will be such a day when a person will run away from his brother
80|35|mother, father
80|36|wife and sons
80|37|for on that day everyone will be completely engrossed in his own concerns
80|38|Some faces on that day will be radiant
80|39|laughing and joyous
80|40|but others will be gloomy
80|41|and covered by darkness
80|42|These will be the faces of the sinful disbelievers
81|1|(On the day) when the sun is made to cease shining
81|2|the stars are made to fade away
81|3|the mountains are scattered about as dust
81|4|the young barren camels are abandoned
81|5|the wild beasts are herded together
81|6|the oceans are brought to a boil
81|7|souls are reunited with their bodies
81|8|questions are asked about the baby girls buried alive
81|9|such as, "For what crime were they murdered
81|10|the records of deeds are made public
81|11|the heavens are unveiled
81|12|hell is made to blaze
81|13|and Paradise is brought near
81|14|then every soul will discover the consequence of its deeds
81|15|I do not need to swear by the orbiting
81|16|stars which are visible during the night
81|17|and sit during the day, or by the darkening night
81|18|and brightening morning
81|19|that the Quran is the word of the honorable angelic, mighty Messenger
81|20|who is honored in the presence of the Lord of the Throne
81|21|obeyed by (all creatures) and faithful to His trust
81|22|Your companion (Muhammad) does not suffer from any mental illness
81|23|He certainly saw him (Gabriel) high up on the horizon in his original form
81|24|He (Muhammad) is not accused of lying about the unseen
81|25|The Quran is not the word of condemned satan
81|26|Where then will you go
81|27|This is certainly the guidance for all (jinn and mankind)
81|28|So let those who want, choose the right guidance
81|29|However, you will not be able to choose anything unless God, Lord of the Universe wills it to be so
82|1|When the heavens are rent asunder
82|2|the stars are dispersed
82|3|the oceans are merged together
82|4|and the graves are turned inside out
82|5|every soul will see the result of its deeds - those recorded before his death and those which will produce either virtue or evil after his death
82|6|Human being, what evil has deceived you about your Gracious Lord
82|7|Who created you proportionately and fashioned you
82|8|in whatever composition He wanted
82|9|Despite this, you deny the Day of Judgment
82|10|but you should know that there are angelic guards
82|11|watching over you
82|12|and these honorable scribes know whatever you do
82|13|The virtuous ones will live in bliss
82|14|and the evil-doers will be in hell
82|15|which they will enter on the Day of Judgment
82|16|to burn therein
82|17|They will never be able to escape from it. Would that you knew what the Day of Judgment is
82|18|Again would that you only knew how terrible it really is
82|19|On that day, no soul will be of any benefit to any other soul. On that day, all affairs will be in the hands of God
83|1|Woe to those who are fraudulent in (weighing and measuring)
83|2|those who demand a full measure from others
83|3|but when they measure or weigh, give less
83|4|Do they not realize that they will be resurrected
83|5|on a great day
83|6|when mankind will stand before the Lord of the Universe
83|7|Woe to them! Let them know that the records of the sinner's deeds are in Sijin
83|8|Would that you knew what Sijin is
83|9|It is a comprehensively written Book (of records)
83|10|Woe, on that day, to those who have rejected God's revelations
83|11|and those who have rejected the Day of Judgment
83|12|No one rejects it except the sinful transgressors
83|13|who, when listening to Our revelations, say, "These are only ancient legends
83|14|They will never have faith. In fact, their hearts are stained from their deeds
83|15|On the Day of Judgment, they will certainly be barred from the mercy of their Lord
83|16|They will suffer the heat of fire
83|17|and who will be told, "This is what you had called a lie
83|18|However, the records of the deeds of the virtuous ones will certainly be in Illiyin
83|19|Would that you knew what Illiyin is
83|20|It is a comprehensively written Book (of records)
83|21|The ones nearest to God will bring it to public
83|22|The virtuous will live in bliss
83|23|reclining on couches, reviewing (the bounties given to them)
83|24|You can trace on their faces the joy of their bliss
83|25|They will be given pure wine out of sealed containers
83|26|which have the fragrance of musk. This is the kind of place for which one should really aspire
83|27|With the wine is a drink from Tasnim
83|28|a spring, the nearest ones to God will drink from it
83|29|The sinners had been laughing at the believers
83|30|When passing by them, they would wink at one another
83|31|and, on returning to their people, boast about what they had done
83|32|On seeing the believers, they would say, "These people have gone astray
83|33|No one has appointed them to watch over the believers
83|34|On the Day of Judgment, the believers will laugh at the disbelievers
83|35|while reclining on couches and reviewing (the bounties given to them)
83|36|Will not the disbelievers then be duly recompensed for their laughing at the believers
84|1|When the heavens are rent asunder
84|2|in obedience to the commands of their Lord which are incumbent on them
84|3|when the earth is stretched out
84|4|and throws out of itself all that it contains
84|5|in obedience to the commands of its Lord which are incumbent on it, (the human being will receive due recompense for his deeds)
84|6|Human being, you strive hard to get closer to your Lord, and so you will certainly receive the recompense (of your deeds)
84|7|The reckoning of those whose Book of records will be given into their right hands
84|8|will be easy
84|9|and they will return to their people, delighted
84|10|But as for those whose Book of records will be given behind their backs
84|11|they will say, "Woe to us
84|12|They will suffer the heat of hell fire
84|13|They lived among their people joyfully
84|14|and had thought that they would never be brought back to life again
84|15|This is a fact. Their Lord is Well-Aware of (all that they do)
84|16|I do not need to swear by the sunset
84|17|or by the night in which things all come together to rest
84|18|or by the moon when it is full
84|19|that you will certainly pass through one stage after another
84|20|What is the matter with them? Why do they not believe
84|21|Why, when the Quran is recited to them, do they not prostrate themselves
84|22|In fact, they reject the Quran
84|23|but God knows best whatever they accumulate in their hearts
84|24|(Muhammad), tell them that they will all suffer a painful torment
84|25|except the righteously striving believers, who will receive a never-ending reward
85|1|By the heavens with constellations
85|2|by the promised day
85|3|and by the witness (Muhammad) and that which is witnessed (the Day of Judgment)
85|4|may the people be condemned those who tortured (the believers) in ditches
85|5|by a burning fire
85|6|while they themselves sat around it
85|7|witnessing what they were doing
85|8|The only reason for which they tormented the believers was the latter's belief in God, the Majestic, and Praiseworthy
85|9|and the One to whom belongs the heavens and the earth. God is the Witness of all things
85|10|Those who persecute the believing men and women without repenting will suffer the torment of hell and that of the burning fire
85|11|As for the righteously striving believers, they will live in Paradise wherein streams flow. This is the greatest triumph
85|12|The vengeance of God is terribly severe
85|13|It is He who creates all things and causes them to return
85|14|He is the All-forgiving, the Most Loving One
85|15|the Owner of the Throne, the Glorious One
85|16|and the Most Effective in His decision
85|17|Have you not heard about the stories of the armies
85|18|of the Pharaoh and Thamud
85|19|In fact, the disbelievers had always rejected (Our revelations)
85|20|However, God encompassed their activities
85|21|What is revealed to you is certainly a glorious Quran
85|22|that exists in a well-guarded tablet
86|1|By the heavens and al-tariq
86|2|Do you know what al-tariq is
86|3|It is a nightly radiant star
86|4|There is no soul which is not guarded (by the two angels who record all of its deeds)
86|5|Let the human being reflect that from what he has been created
86|6|He has been created from an ejected drop of fluid
86|7|which comes out of the loins and ribs
86|8|God has all power to resurrect him
86|9|On the day when all secrets will be made public
86|10|he will have no power, nor anyone to help him
86|11|By the rotating heavens
86|12|and the replenishing earth
86|13|the Quran is the final word
86|14|and it is certainly not a jest
86|15|They (disbelievers) plot every evil plan
86|16|but I too plan against them
86|17|Give respite to the disbelievers and leave them alone for a while
87|1|(Muhammad), glorify the Name of your lord, the Most High
87|2|Who has created (all things) proportionately
87|3|decreed their destinies, and provided them with guidance
87|4|It is He who has caused the grass to grow
87|5|then caused it to wither away
87|6|We shall teach you (the Quran) and you will not forget it
87|7|unless God wills it to be otherwise. He knows all that is made public and all that remains hidden
87|8|We shall make all your tasks easy
87|9|Therefore, keep on preaching as long as it is of benefit
87|10|Those who have fear of God will benefit
87|11|but the reprobates will turn away
87|12|and suffer the heat of the great fire
87|13|wherein they will neither live nor die
87|14|Lasting happiness will be for those who purify themselves
87|15|remember the name of the Lord, and pray to Him
87|16|However, (the disbelievers) prefer the worldly life
87|17|even though the life hereafter will be better and will last forever
87|18|This is what is written in the ancient heavenly Books
87|19|the Scriptures of Abraham and Moses
88|1|Have you heard the story of the overwhelming event (the Day of Judgment)
88|2|On that day the faces of some people will be humbly cast down
88|3|troubled and tired as a result of their deeds in the past
88|4|They will suffer the heat of the blazing fire
88|5|and will be made to drink from a fiercely boiling spring
88|6|They will have no food other than bitter and thorny fruit
88|7|which will neither fatten them nor satisfy them
88|8|However, on that day the faces of other people will be happy
88|9|and pleased with the result of their deeds in the past
88|10|They will live in an exalted garden
88|11|wherein they will not hear any vain talk
88|12|Therein will be a flowing spring
88|13|raised couches
88|14|well arranged goblets
88|15|well-placed cushions
88|16|and well spread carpets
88|17|Have they not looked at how the camel is created
88|18|how the heavens are raised up high
88|19|how the mountains are set firm
88|20|and how the earth is spread out
88|21|(Muhammad), preach; you are only a preacher
88|22|You do not have full control over them
88|23|However, those who turn away and disbelieve
88|24|God will punish them with the greatest torment
88|25|To Us they will all return
88|26|In Our hands are their accounts
89|1|By the dawn
89|2|by the Ten (secret) Nights
89|3|by the odd and even (8th and 9th Dhil-hajj)
89|4|and by the night when it moves on towards daybreak (reward and retribution in the next life is an absolute reality)
89|5|Is this not a sufficient oath for intelligent people
89|6|(Muhammad), consider how your Lord dealt with the tribe of Ad
89|7|the people of the huge columned city of Eram
89|8|whose like has never been created in any other land
89|9|(Also consider how He dealt with) the Thamud, who carved their houses out of the rocks in the valley
89|10|(Also consider the people of) the Pharaoh who victimized people by placing them on the stake
89|11|led rebellious lives
89|12|and spread much corruption in the land
89|13|Thus, your Lord afflicted them with torment
89|14|your Lord keeps an eye on (all evil-doing people)
89|15|As for the human being, when his Lord tests him, honors him, and grants him bounty, he says, "God has honored me
89|16|However, when his Lord tests him by a measured amount of sustenance, he says, "God has disgraced me
89|17|(Since wealth does not necessarily guarantee everlasting happiness) then why do you not show kindness to the orphans
89|18|or urge one another to feed the destitute
89|19|Why do you take away the inheritance of others indiscriminately
89|20|and why do you have an excessive love of riches
89|21|When the earth is crushed into small pieces
89|22|and (when you find yourself) in the presence of your Lord and the rows and rows of angels, your greed for riches will certainly be of no avail to you
89|23|On that day, hell will be brought closer and the human being will come to his senses, but this will be of no avail to him
89|24|He will say, "Would that I had done some good deeds for this life
89|25|On that day the punishment of God and His detention will be unparalleled
89|26|And His bonds will be such as none other can bind
89|27|Serene soul
89|28|return to your Lord well pleased with him and He will be pleased with you
89|29|Enter among My servants
89|30|into My Paradise
90|1|I do not (need to) swear by this town (Mecca)
90|2|in which you are now living
90|3|or by the great father and his wonderful son (Abraham and Ishmael)
90|4|that We have created the human being to face a great deal of hardship
90|5|Does He think that no one will ever have control over him
90|6|(He boasts and shows off) saying, "I have spent a great deal of money (for the cause of God)
90|7|Does he think that no one has seen him
90|8|Have We not given him two eyes
90|9|a tongue, and two lips
90|10|Have We not shown him the ways of good and evil
90|11|Yet, he has not entered into Aqaba
90|12|Would that you knew what Aqaba is
90|13|It is the setting free of a slave
90|14|or, in a day of famine, the feeding of
90|15|an orphaned relative
90|16|and downtrodden destitute person, (so that he would be of)
90|17|the believers who cooperate with others in patience (steadfastness) and kindness
90|18|These are the people of the right hand
90|19|As for those who disbelieve in Our revelations, they are the people of the left
90|20|who will be engulfed in the fire
91|1|By the sun and its noon-time brightness
91|2|by the moon when it follows the sun
91|3|by the day when it brightens the earth
91|4|by the night when it covers the earth with darkness
91|5|by the heavens and that (Power) which established them
91|6|by the earth and that (Power) which spread it out
91|7|and by the soul and that (Power) which designed it
91|8|and inspired it with knowledge of evil and piety
91|9|those who purify their souls will certainly have everlasting happiness
91|10|and those who corrupt their souls will certainly be deprived (of happiness)
91|11|The people of Thamud rejected (the truth) as a result of their rebelliousness
91|12|when the most corrupt of them incited them (to commit evil)
91|13|The Messenger of God told them, "This is a she-camel, belonging to God. Do not deprive her of her share of water
91|14|However, they rejected him and slew her. So their Lord completely destroyed them and their city for their sins
91|15|God is not afraid of the result of what He had decreed
92|1|By the night when it covers the day
92|2|by the day when it appears radiant
92|3|and by that (Power) which created the male and female
92|4|you strive in various ways
92|5|We shall facilitate the path to bliss
92|6|for those who spend for the cause of God
92|7|observe piety, and believe in receiving rewards from God
92|8|But for those who are niggardly, horde their wealth
92|9|and have no faith in receiving any reward (from God)
92|10|We shall facilitate the path to affliction
92|11|and their wealth will be of no benefit to them when they face destruction
92|12|Surely, in Our hands is guidance
92|13|and to Us belong the hereafter and the worldly life
92|14|I have warned you about the fierce blazing fire
92|15|in which no one will suffer forever
92|16|except the wicked ones who have rejected the (Truth) and have turned away from it
92|17|The pious ones who spend for the cause of God
92|18|and purify themselves will be safe from this fire
92|19|They do not expect any reward
92|20|except the pleasure of their Lord, the Most High
92|21|and the reward (of their Lord) will certainly make them happy
93|1|By the midday brightness
93|2|and by the calm of night
93|3|(Muhammad), your Lord has not abandoned you (by not sending you His revelation), nor is He displeased with you
93|4|The reward in the next life will certainly be better for you than worldly gains
93|5|Your Lord will soon grant you sufficient favors to please you
93|6|Did He not find you as an orphan and give you shelter
93|7|Did He not find you wandering about and give you guidance
93|8|And did He not find you in need and make you rich
93|9|Do not oppress the orphans
93|10|and do not reject the beggars
93|11|and proclaim the bounties of your Lord
94|1|(Muhammad), have We not comforted your heart
94|2|relieved you of the burden
94|3|which had been a heavy weight upon your back
94|4|and granted you an exalted reputation
94|5|After every difficulty there is relief
94|6|Certainly, after every difficulty there comes relief
94|7|When you are free from (your obligations), strive hard (to worship God)
94|8|and be devoted to your Lord's service
95|1|By the fig, by the olive
95|2|by Mount Sinai
95|3|and by this inviolable city, Mecca
95|4|We have created the human being in the best form
95|5|and We shall make him the lowest of low
95|6|except the righteously striving believers who will have a never ending reward
95|7|After (knowing) this, what makes you still disbelieve in the Day of Judgment
95|8|Is God not the best of the Judges
96|1|(Muhammad), read in the name of your Lord who created (all things)
96|2|He created man from a clot of blood
96|3|Recite! Your Lord is the most Honorable One
96|4|who, by the pen, taught the human being
96|5|He taught the human being what he did not know
96|6|Despite this, the human being still tends to rebel
96|7|because he thinks that he is independent
96|8|However, (all things) will return to your Lord
96|9|Have you seen the one who prohibits
96|10|a servant of Ours from prayer
96|11|What will happen if the praying person is rightly guided
96|12|or if he commands others to maintain piety
96|13|What will happen if the prohibiting rejects the Truth and turns away from it
96|14|Does he not realize that God sees him
96|15|Let him know that if he does not desist, We shall certainly drag him by his forelocks
96|16|his lying sinful forelock
96|17|Let him call on his associates for help
96|18|and We too will call the stern and angry keepers of hell
96|19|(Muhammad), never yield to him! Prostrate yourself and try to come closer to God
97|1|We revealed the Quran on the Night of Destiny
97|2|Would that you knew what the Night of Destiny is
97|3|(Worship) on the Night of Destiny is better than (worship) for a thousand months
97|4|On this Night, the angels and the spirit descend by the permission of their Lord with His decree (to determine everyone's destiny)
97|5|This Night is all peace until the break of dawn
98|1|The disbelievers among the People of the Book and the pagans disbelieved (in Islam) only after receiving divine testimony
98|2|a Messenger (Muhammad) from God, reciting to them parts of the purified
98|3|holy Book which contain eternal laws of guidance
98|4|Nor did the People of the Book disagreed among themselves until after receiving the ancient divine testaments
98|5|They were only commanded to worship God, be uprightly devoted to His religion, steadfast in prayer and pay the zakat. This is truly the eternal religion
98|6|The disbelievers among the People of the Book and the pagans will dwell forever in hell; they are the worst of all creatures
98|7|The righteously striving believers are the best of all creatures
98|8|Their reward from their Lord will be the gardens of Eden wherein streams flow and wherein they will live forever. God will be pleased with them and they will be pleased with Him. This (reward) is for those who fear their Lord
99|1|When the earth is shaken by a terrible quake
99|2|and it throws out its burden
99|3|the human being will say (in horror), "What is happening to it
99|4|On that day the earth will declare all (the activities of the human being) which have taken place on it
99|5|having been inspired by your Lord
99|6|On that day, people will come out of their graves in different groups to see (the results of) their own deeds
99|7|Whoever has done an atom's weight of good
99|8|will see it and whoever has done an atom's weight of evil, will also see it
100|1|(I swear) by the snorting chargers (of the warriors), whose hoofs strike against the rocks
100|2|and produce sparks
100|3|while running during a raid at dawn
100|4|and leave behind a cloud of dust
100|5|which engulfs the enemy
100|6|The human being is certainly ungrateful to his Lord
100|7|He himself knows this very well
100|8|He certainly has a strong love for wealth and riches
100|9|Does he not know that on the day when those in the graves are resurrected
100|10|and all that is in the hearts is made public
100|11|their Lord will examine his deeds
101|1|The (unprecedented) crash
101|2|What is the crash
101|3|Would that you knew what the crash is
101|4|On that day, people will be like scattered moths
101|5|and mountains will be like carded wool
101|6|Those whose good deeds will weigh heavier (on the scale)
101|7|will live a pleasant life
101|8|but those whose good deeds will be lighter (on the scale)
101|9|will have hawiyah as their dwelling
101|10|Would that you knew what hawiya his
101|11|It is a burning Fire
102|1|The desire to have more of the worldly gains have pre-occupied you so much (that you have neglected remembring God)
102|2|until you come to the graves
102|3|You shall know
102|4|You shall cetainly know (about the consequences of your deeds)
102|5|You will certainly have the knowledge of your deeds beyond all doubt
102|6|You will be shown hell
102|7|and you will see it with your own eyes
102|8|Then, on that day, you will be questioned about the bounties (of God)
103|1|By the time (of the advent of Islam)
103|2|the human being is doomed to suffer loss
103|3|except the righteously striving believers who exhort each other to truthful purposes and to patience
104|1|Woe to every slanderer and backbiter
104|2|who collects and hordes wealth
104|3|thinking that his property will make him live forever
104|4|By no means! They will be thrown into hutamah
104|5|Would that you knew what hutamah is
104|6|It is a fierce fire created by God
104|7|to penetrate into the hearts
104|8|It will engulf them
104|9|in its long columns of flames
105|1|Have you not considered how your Lord dealt with the people of the elephant
105|2|Did He not cause their evil plots to fail
105|3|by sending against them flocks of swallows
105|4|which showered them with small pebbles of clay
105|5|to turn them into (something) like the left-over grass grazed by cattle
106|1|For God's favors to them during their summer and winter journeys
106|2|Quraish should worship the Lord of this House
106|3|It is He who has fed them when they were hungry
106|4|and has made them secure from fear
107|1|Have you seen the one who calls the religion a lie
107|2|It is he who turns down the orphans
107|3|and never encourages the feeding of the destitute
107|4|Woe to the worshippers
107|5|who become confused during their prayers
107|6|who show off (his good deeds)
107|7|and refuse to help the needy
108|1|(Muhammad), We have granted you abundant virtue
108|2|So worship your Lord and make sacrificial offerings
108|3|Whoever hates you will himself remain childless
109|1|(Muhammad), tell the disbelievers
109|2|I do not worship what you worship
109|3|nor do you worship what I worship
109|4|I have not been worshipping what you worshipped
109|5|nor will you worship what I shall worship
109|6|You follow your religion and I follow mine
110|1|(Muhammad), when help and victory comes from God
110|2|you will see large groups of people embracing the religion of God
110|3|Glorify your Lord with praise and ask Him for forgivenes. He accepts repentance
111|1|May the hands of Abu Lahab perish
111|2|May he too perish
111|3|His property and worldly gains will be of no help to him
111|4|He will suffer in a blazing fire
111|5|and so too will his wife who (threw thorns and firewood in the Prophet's way). Around her neck will be a rope of palm fibre
112|1|(Muhammad), say, "He is the only God
112|2|God is Absolute
112|3|He neither begets nor was He begotten
112|4|There is no one equal to Him
113|1|(Muhammad), say, "I seek protection from the Lord of the Dawn
113|2|against the evil of whatever He has created
113|3|I seek His protection against the evil of the invading darkness
113|4|from the evil of those who practice witchcraft
113|5|and from the evil of the envious ones
114|1|(Muhammad), say, "I seek protection from the Cherisher of mankind
114|2|the King of mankind
114|3|the Lord of mankind
114|4|against the evil of the temptations of the satans
114|5|of jinn and human beings
114|6|who induce temptation into the hearts of mankind
{
    "name": "eng-muhammadsarwar",
    "author": "Muhammad Sarwar",
    "language": "English",
    "direction": "ltr",
    "source": "http://tanzil.net",
    "comments": "",
    "link": "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/fawazahmed0/quran-api@1/editions/eng-muhammadsarwar.json",
    "linkmin": "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/fawazahmed0/quran-api@1/editions/eng-muhammadsarwar.min.json"
}