1|1|In the name of Allah, the most Merciful, the most Beneficent
1|2|All praise belongs to Allah, the Lord of the universe
1|3|The most Merciful, the most Beneficent
1|4|Master of the Day of Judgment
1|5|You alone do we worship, and You alone do we ask for help
1|6|Guide us to the Straight Path
1|7|The path of those upon whom You have bestowed Your blessings! Not the path of those who earned Your wrath, or erred and went astray
2|1|Alif, Laam, Meem
2|2|This is the (divine) book! In it, there is nothing doubtful. (It is) the guidance for the pious
2|3|(The guidance for) those who believe in the unseen, establish the ´salat´ and spend (for Our sake) out of what We grant them
2|4|(The guidance for) those who believe in what is revealed to you (O Muhammad, SAW), and in that which was revealed prior to you! Those who are certain about the hereafter _ (the life-to-come)
2|5|Such are the ones guided by their Lord! Such are the successful ones
2|6|And for those who (choose to) reject, it is all the same. They will not believe, whether you warn them or not
2|7|Allah has sealed off their heart and their hearing. A blindfold blocks their sight. There is the gravest (most awful) torment for them
2|8|There are those among mankind who say, ´We believe in Allah and the Last Day´ when in fact, they do not believe
2|9|They (attempt to) deceive Allah and the believers; in reality, they deceive no one but themselves. They just do not realize
2|10|They have the disease (of doubt) in their heart, and Allah makes their disease grow. Because they deny (the truth), there exists a painful punishment for them
2|11|When they are told, "Do not promote disorder and decadence in the world", they respond, "But we are really the reformers
2|12|Not at all! They are the ones who are really the corrupters. But little do they realize
2|13|When they are told, ´Believe (in earnest) just as others have believed´, they answer, "Should we believe like the fools?" Not at all! In fact, it is they who are the fools, but they do not know
2|14|When they meet the believers they say, "We believe" but when they are alone with their Shaitans _ (others like themselves) _ they say, "We are actually with you. We were merely mocking and making fun
2|15|Allah makes fun of them! He allows them an extension, and lets them wander about blindly in their arrogant excesses
2|16|Such ones have traded away the guidance for fallacy and falsehood. Gain is not what their bargain brought them. They are not guided
2|17|Their example is that of those who kindled a fire (to see in the dark). But just as it lit up their surroundings, Allah took away their light _ (their eyesight) _ and left them groping in utter darkness. (Now), they just do not see
2|18|They are deaf, dumb and blind. They will not return
2|19|Or it is like the rainstorm in the sky, which brings in its wake utter darkness, thunder and lightning! Out of the fear of death (and darkness), they stick their fingers in their ears to keep out (the sounds of) thunder. (The might of) Allah surrounds the unbelievers completely
2|20|Lightning almost snatches their sight away. During the flashes of lightning they walk, and they stand still when it is dark. Allah could have taken away their hearing and their sight, had He so willed. Indeed, Allah is capable of doing everything
2|21|Oh mankind! Worship your Lord Who created you, and those before you. Perhaps you will attain piety
2|22|It is He Who stretched the earth for you like a carpet, and the sky (over you) like a canopy. From the sky, He sent down water, and with it He brought forth fruits for your sustenance. Therefore, do not rank others as rivals of Allah. You do know (the truth)
2|23|If you have any doubt about what We have revealed to Our servant (Muhammad, SAW) then present just a single chapter (Sura) like it. Call your witnesses, besides Allah, if you are truthful
2|24|But if you do not _ and surely you shall not _ then fear the fire whose fuel is men and stones. It is prepared for (all) those who do not believe
2|25|Give the good news to those who believe and do the righteous deeds. Theirs shall be the gardens (of paradise) through which run the rivers. There, as they taste the fruits (of paradise), they would remark, "This, we were given before, too (in the world)". There, they would certainly be granted the identical (blessings). There, they shall have pure and immaculate mates. And there, they shall live forever
2|26|Of course, Allah is not ashamed to quote and narrate the parable of a gnat, or anything smaller. Those who believe know that it certainly is the truth from their Lord. But those who disbelieve, say, "What does Allah mean by this parable?" Thereby, He causes many to stray, and leads many others to the right path! By that, He misleads only the sinful rebellious ones
2|27|Those who, after having affirmed solemnly, break their covenant with Allah; those who (violate and) sever that which Allah has deemed inviolable, and has ordered to be joined. They cause chaos in the world. Such ones are the losers
2|28|How can you not believe in Allah? You were (once) lifeless and He gave you life. Then, He will give you death, and then He will bring you back to life. Then, you shall return to Him
2|29|He it is, Who created for you every single thing that exists on earth. Then, He turned to the heavens. He evened and fashioned them into seven heavens. He is fully aware of every single thing
2|30|And (remember) when your Lord said to the angels, "I am going to appoint a deputy (a viceroy) on earth." They said, "Would You place a species on earth that will cause chaos, and shed blood? We chant Your praises, and We venerate and glorify Your name (constantly)." He said, "I, of course know that, which you do not know
2|31|And He taught Adam the names of all the things. Then, presented them before the angels and said, "Tell Me the names of all these (things) if you are right
2|32|They said, "Exalted are You! We know nothing more than what You have taught us. Undoubtedly, You (and only You) are the all-Knowing, the Wisest
2|33|He said, "Oh Adam, Tell them all the names!" Then, when Adam had told them all the names (Allah) declared, "Did I not tell you that I alone know all the (mysteries and) secrets of the heavens and the earth. I know what you disclose and what you conceal
2|34|And when We told the angels to prostrate before Adam, they all fell prostrate except Iblees _ (the Shaitan). He refused and displayed arrogance. He was the disbeliever
2|35|And We said, "Oh Adam, you and your wife may live in paradise. Here, the two of you may eat anything you wish, to your heart´s delight. But do not come near this one tree. Else, you would be the wrong doers
2|36|But Shaitan made them lapse and stumble; they forgot this (command). He had them both expelled from the happy state they were in. We said, "Get down from here! Both of you _ (Men and Shaitans) _ are each other´s enemies. On the earth shall be your habitat and your sustenance for an appointed term
2|37|Then, Adam learnt from his Lord the words (to repent with), and He accepted the repentance. Indeed, He it is Who accepts repentance, and He is the most Merciful
2|38|We said, "Get down from the paradise, all of you. (Wait) till the guidance comes to you from Me. Then, whoever follows My guidance shall have no fear. Nor shall he ever grieve
2|39|While those, who disbelieve and deny Our revelations, will (actually) be the inmates of fire. They will stay in it forever
2|40|Oh children of Israel! Bear in mind (all) My favors that I bestowed upon you. Live up to your pledge with Me, and I will fulfill My promise with you. Fear Me (and none else)
2|41|And believe in what I have revealed _ (the Qur´an). It confirms the scriptures you already have. Do not be the first to reject it. Do not sell my verses for a paltry price. And be (forever) conscious of Me
2|42|And, do not cloak (and confuse) the truth with falsehood. Do not suppress the truth knowingly
2|43|And perform the ´salat´ and pay the ´zakat´. Bow down (and submit) along with others, who bow in worship
2|44|You exhort others to acquire piety, but forget (to include) yourself. You do recite the scriptures! Have you, then, no sense
2|45|Seek help and solace through prayers and patience. Of course it is hard, except for those who are humble of heart
2|46|Those who are certain that they shall meet their Lord; that they are definitely going to return to Him
2|47|Oh children of Israel! Remember My favors that I bestowed upon you. Indeed, I gave you precedence over the entire world
2|48|Be conscious of the day when no soul shall avail any other in the least. Mediation will not be accepted from anyone. Ransom will be received from none! They will not be helped at all
2|49|And (remember) when We saved you from the people of the pharaoh? They persecuted you with the most horrendous torture. They slaughtered your sons, and spared your women. In that was a mighty grave trial from your Lord
2|50|And remember when We parted the sea for you? We rescued you when We drowned the followers of the pharaoh before your very eyes
2|51|And (remember) when We appointed for Musa forty nights (on Mount Sinai). During his absence, you took up the worship of a calf! You are the wrongdoers
2|52|Yet, We forgave you for that. Perhaps you would be grateful
2|53|And remember, then We granted Musa the scriptures and the criterion. Perhaps, you would find the right path
2|54|And (remember) when Musa said to his people, "Oh my people! You have certainly wronged yourself by taking up the worship of a calf. (Now), turn to your Maker in repentance and kill (the guilty ones among) yourself. That, in the eyes of your Maker, is better for you." He, then accepted your repentance. Indeed, He it is Who accepts repentance, and He is the most Merciful
2|55|And (remember) when you said, "Oh Musa! We will not believe you, until we can perceive Allah in plain view right before our eyes." So, a bolt of lightning dealt you a deathblow while you looked on
2|56|Then, after your death, We revived you. Perhaps you would be grateful
2|57|We arranged for you the shade of clouds (in the desert), and (as food) We sent down the ´manna´ and the ´salva´ for you. "Eat the wholesome food We grant you." It was not Us they harmed, but they used to harm themselves
2|58|And (remember) when We said, "Enter this town and partake of its bounties with relish; anything you wish. But, go past the gate prostrate (before Allah) and keep uttering ´repentance´. We will forgive your sins, and We will increase the reward of the righteous
2|59|But the evildoers changed the word that was prescribed to them, to one that was quite different. Therefore, from the sky We sent down a blight upon the evil doers, because they used to disobey repeatedly
2|60|And (remember) when Musa asked for water? We said, "Strike that rock with your staff!" Twelve springs gushed forth from the rock and each tribe knew its water supply (exactly). "Eat and drink the provisions Allah has granted, and do not act wickedly in the world like mischief makers
2|61|And (remember) when you said, "Oh Musa! We are weary of just one kind of food (all the time). So call your Lord for us and ask Him to provide us with what the earth produces _ the herbs, the cucumbers, the corn, the garlic and the onions. (Musa) said, "Do you want to substitute the superior (and the sublime) with that which is petty _ (the mean and the mundane)? Go and settle in any town, and there you will find all that you ask for." Disgrace and wretchedness were decreed for them. They drew the wrath of Allah upon themselves, because they repeatedly rejected the revelations (and signs) of Allah, and (because) they killed the prophets without a reason! Because they disobeyed, and used to stray beyond the bounds
2|62|In fact, all those _ be they the believers, the Jews, the Christians or the Sabians _ who believe in Allah and the Last Day, and do the righteous deeds shall have their reward with their Lord. They shall have no fear, nor shall they ever grieve
2|63|And (remember) when We got a firm pledge from you as We caused the mountain, ´Toor´, to tower high above you. (We said), "Hold on fast, with all your strength, to what We grant you; and (always) remember the guidance it contains. Perhaps you would attain piety
2|64|But, even then you (ignored and) turned away. Had it not been for the favors of Allah upon you, and His grace, you would have been the losers (long ago)
2|65|Of course, you know very well (the fate of) those of you who exceeded the bounds (and broke the laws) of Sabbath. We said (to them), "You be the apes, despised and spurned
2|66|We turned them into an (eye opening) example for their generation, and for others to follow. (We turned them into) an admonition for the pious
2|67|And (remember that incident) when Musa said to his people, "Allah, in fact, commands you to slaughter a cow." They said, "Are you joking with us?" (Musa) said, "I seek refuge with Allah that I would be so ignorant
2|68|They said, "(Oh Musa), call your Lord for us and have Him ascertain for us, (exactly) what is it (that He wants slaughtered)?" Musa said, "In fact, He says that the cow should neither be too old nor too young, but rather of an age between the two extremes. Now carry out what you are told
2|69|(Again) they said, "(Oh Musa), call your Lord for us, and have Him ascertain for us its color." (Musa) said, "He says that the cow is yellow; bright and brilliant yellow that delights the onlookers
2|70|They said, "Call your Lord (again) for us to ascertain (exactly) which (cow) is it? In fact, all cows look alike to us. If Allah wills, we would of course be guided aright (and would find the right cow)
2|71|(Musa)) said, "As a matter of fact, He says that this cow is not yoked or burdened. It does not plough the land, nor does it irrigate the field. It is unscathed, and without a blemish; it is free of faults." They said, "Now you have brought the truth." Then they slaughtered it, but they almost didn´t do it
2|72|And (remember) when you had killed a person and had accused each other (of his murder)? Allah was going to bring out into the open that which you were hiding
2|73|So We said, "Strike the corpse with a piece (of the carcass)." Thus, Allah brings the dead back to life. He displays His signs to you. Perhaps, you would understand
2|74|Yet, even after that your heart grew (cold and) callous; as if they were rocks. Rather, they became harder than rocks. Because, there are rocks through which springs gush forth! Moisture oozes through some (rocks) as they split apart. And there are rocks that (tremble and) come tumbling down because of the fear of Allah. And Allah is not unaware of anything you do
2|75|Do you expect them to believe in you? (Such are they, that) a group of them hears the word of Allah, understands it well, and then deliberately (twists and) distorts its meaning
2|76|When they meet the believers, they say, "We believe!" But when they are alone with each other, they say, "Would you report to them what Allah has revealed to you? So they may (successfully) argue and plead against you before your Lord? Do you not understand
2|77|Are they not aware that Allah knows what they narrate in secret as well as what they proclaim
2|78|Some of them are illiterate and know nothing about the scriptures. They (only) have wishful fancies and (rely upon) conjecture
2|79|And misery is for (their scholars,) those who write a book with their own hands and then say, "This is from Allah!" In return for that, they acquire a petty price. Woe to them for what they write with their hands! Woe to them for what they earn with it
2|80|And they say, "The fire will not touch us except for a few days, if at all." Say, "Do you have a pledge from Allah (concerning that)? A firm pledge that Allah will not breach? Or do you say about Allah that, which you do not know
2|81|Of course! Those who commit evil and are wrapped (and steeped) in sin will be the inmates of the fire! They shall stay in it forever
2|82|While those who believe and do the righteous deeds, are the inhabitants of paradise. In it, they shall live forever
2|83|And (remember) when We entered into a pact with the children of Israel. We said, "You shall worship none except Allah. You shall be good (and dutiful) to your parents, and kind and courteous to your kindred, the orphans and the needy. You shall be polite to people! (Furthermore), you shall perform the ´salat´ and pay the ´zakat´. But, with the exception of a few, you all turned away and ignored (the pledge)
2|84|And (remember) when We obtained a firm pledge from you that, "You shall not shed the blood of any of your own (people), nor expel them from their homes." Then, you assented and affirmed (the pledge), and you are the witnesses
2|85|Yet, it is you who killed one another. You drove one of your groups out of their homes. With sin and transgression aforethought, you assisted their enemies against them. You demanded ransom when some of your own people were brought as captives before you. In fact, you were forbidden to expel them from their homes (in the first place). Do you believe in just some parts of the scriptures, and reject the rest? What is the fair recompense for the one among you who does that? (What else) except disgrace in the life of this world? On the day of resurrection, they are destined to be consigned to the (severest) most grievous punishment. Allah is not unaware of anything you do
2|86|These are the ones who bought the life of this world at the cost of the life-to-come. Their torment will not be lightened, nor will they be helped
2|87|It was We Who gave Musa the Book (the Torah). Then, after him, We sent down many messengers, one after the other. It was We Who gave Jesus, son of Mary, several undeniable proofs; and it was We Who supported him with the exalted Angels. You behaved arrogantly whenever the messengers brought something your hearts disapproved. You called some of them liars, and even killed a few
2|88|They boast, "Our hearts have been protected and rendered resistant to your reasons." (The actual words: covered with a protective layer). On the contrary! As a consequence of their rejection, Allah has cursed them; and now, very few amongst them will ever believe
2|89|And now there has come to them a book (the Qur´an) from Allah, confirming that (book) which is already with them. Prior to this, they used to cite their book as authority during arguments with the idolaters. Yet, now that it has come to them, they reject it, even though they have recognized it (to be true)
2|90|They have knowingly rejected the truth because of their animosity of a people, one of whom has been chosen by Allah as a messenger. Allah showers His blessings upon whomever He wishes! So, they earned Allah´s wrath even as He was already angry at them. A disgraceful punishment awaits the disbelievers
2|91|When they are invited to accept the message that Allah has revealed, they say, "We only believe in what was sent down to us." They reject everything that is revealed elsewhere, even if it is the truth; even if it confirms that which they already possess. Ask them, "Why, then, did you kill the prophets of Allah, if you consider yourselves to be the true believers
2|92|Musa brought to you the clear signs. Yet, as soon as his back was turned, you took a calf as your god. You surely are the transgressors
2|93|And remember when We raised the (Mountain) ´Toor´ over you, and We took a firm promise from you. We said, "With all your strength, hold on fast to that which We award you, and do heed the instructions!" To that you replied, "We heard but we shall not obey!" Because of their rejection the love of the calf sank deep into their hearts. Say, "Are you really the true believers? Your belief sure makes you perform despicable acts
2|94|Say, "If you believe that the Hereafter is reserved exclusively for you and other people shall have no part of it, then you should not be afraid to die. Let us hear you wish for death (out loud), if you are sincere
2|95|They will never ever wish for death, because they are aware of their own misdeeds. Allah knows the transgressors
2|96|You will surely find that they are greedier than any other people _ even more than the idolaters _ to live a long life. Each one of them longs to live the life of a thousand years. But a long life is not going to save them from the torment in any way. Allah watches (vigilantly) everything they do
2|97|Inform the one who is the enemy of Gibrael _ (the angel who brought the revelation). It is of course by Allah´s leave that he revealed the Qur´an to your heart. It confirms that which preceded it. It is the guidance and the good news for the believers
2|98|Whoever is the enemy of Allah, His angels, His messengers, (angels) Gibrael and Mikael (should know that) indeed, Allah is the enemy of those who reject the truth
2|99|We have certainly revealed to you the most manifest signs (the crystal clear revelations)! No one except the immoral (miscreants) reject them
2|100|Isn´t it always the same? Whenever they enter into a covenant (with Allah), some of them cast it aside. The fact is, most of them do not believe
2|101|And now, there has come to them a messenger from Allah who has confirmed that which they already have with them. Yet, some of those who were given the scriptures (earlier) toss the book of Allah behind their backs. (They act) as if they know nothing
2|102|They pursued whatever the Shaitans recited (and related) to them in the name and authority of King Sulaiman. It was not Sulaiman who disbelieved (or disobeyed). The Shaitans disbelieved (and denied). They taught people the craft of magic and that (esoteric) art that was revealed to the two angels, Harut and Marut at Babylon. Before the two angels would teach that craft to anyone, they would declare, "We are actually just a trial for you. So do not (succumb to temptations and) be the disbelievers." Yet they studied from those two (angels), that which caused estrangement between a man and his wife. No one could they harm by it, except by Allah´s permission. They studied that which could only hurt them; it did not benefit them (at all). They definitely knew that the one who acquires this (craft) shall have no share in the (blessings of the) life-to-come. And evil indeed was what they purchased (and paid for) with their souls! If only they knew
2|103|The rewards from Allah would have been much better, had they just believed and warded off evil. If they only knew
2|104|Oh you who believe! Do not say (to the messenger), "Rai´na" _ (´listen to us´ in Arabic, but an insult in Hebrew). Rather say, "Bear with us, and hear us out." There is a painful punishment for the unbelievers
2|105|The unbelievers _ be they among the people of the scriptures, or among the idolaters _ would not like to see any blessings ever conferred upon you by your Lord. But, for His mercy Allah selects whom He wants. Allah is the Lord of Infinite Grace and Bounties
2|106|We do not annul any of Our revelations nor let it be forgotten, unless We replace it with a better one, or (at least) the one similar to it. Do you not know that Allah has power over all things
2|107|Do you not know that it is indeed Allah to Whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. You have no protectors or helpers other than Him
2|108|Would you ask your messenger the same sort of questions Musa was asked earlier? In fact, anyone who chooses disbelief over faith has strayed far away from the right way
2|109|Many of the people of the book like to convert you back to disbelief after your acceptance of faith. (They do so) because of their (egocentric) envy, even though the truth has become clear to them. So forbear and overlook (their arrogance), until Allah enforces the command. Of course Allah has absolute power over all things
2|110|Establish the ´salat, and pay the ´zakat´. With Allah, you will find (the reward for) every righteous deed you send ahead. Indeed, Allah is well aware of every single thing you do
2|111|They say, "No one shall ever enter paradise unless he was a Jew or a Christian." These are merely their wishful fancies. Say, "Quote your proof, if you are truthful
2|112|On the contrary! Anyone who surrenders his entire being to (the will of) Allah, and is among the righteous ones, shall have his reward with his Lord. Such ones shall have no fear, nor shall they ever grieve
2|113|The Jews assert that the Christians do not follow anything (that is true), and the Christians claim that the Jews follow nothing (that is true). Yet, they recite the (same) book. Others with no knowledge (of the scriptures) have also made similar claims. On the Day of Judgment, Allah will render judgment concerning all matters of dispute between them
2|114|Can anyone be more unjust (and evil) than the one who forbids people from mentioning His name in Allah´s Houses of worship, and does his utmost to hurt them? In fact, such (unjust) ones are themselves not worthy of being let into the Holy House except in fear. Disgrace is their lot in this world, and in the life-to-come they shall have the severest (most awful) punishment
2|115|The East, and the West belong to Allah. Face any direction, and right there is the face of Allah (in that very direction)! Indeed, Allah is the Infinite, the all-Knowing
2|116|They said, "Allah begot a son!" Exalted is He! In fact, everything in the heavens and on earth belongs to Him. All things (and beings) submit to Him in obedience
2|117|(He is) the (Initiator and the) Originator of the heavens and the earth. Once He decrees anything, He (merely) says to it, "Be!" and it becomes
2|118|Those who have no knowledge (of reality) said, "Why does Allah not speak to us (Himself)? Why does a sign not come to us?" People (who lived) before them had also said the same thing in (more or less) the same words. Their hearts are closely aligned! We have (already) made Our signs manifest for the nation that has the certainty of belief
2|119|(Oh prophet), We have certainly sent you with the truth; as a bearer of good news, and as a warner. You will not be asked about the inmates of the hellfire
2|120|The Jews and the Christian will never be pleased with you, unless you follow their creed. Say, "The guidance of Allah is the real guidance." The (certainty of) knowledge has come to you. If, despite that you followed their whims and wishes, then (know for sure that) you will not find any protector or helper against Allah
2|121|They, to whom We have given the book, recite it as it deserves to be recited. They really do believe in it; whereas those who deny it are the losers
2|122|Oh children of Israel! Recall My (special) favors that I bestowed upon you. Indeed, I gave you precedence over the entire world
2|123|Fear that day when no person shall assist another in the least. No ransom will be accepted from anyone, and no mediation (of any kind) will benefit anyone
2|124|And (remember) when his Lord put Ibraheem through a trial by means of (a series of) commands, and he fulfilled all of them? Then He said, "I am certainly going to appoint you the leader of mankind!" (Ibraheem) said, "And my descendants, (too)?" Allah said, "My promise does not pertain to the unjust _ the evildoers
2|125|And (remember that) We designated the House of Worship (built by Ibraheem) to be the resort of peace, and a sanctuary for mankind. So, consider the place where Ibraheem stood to be the (sacred) place to pray. We entrusted Ibraheem and Ismail with the duty of keeping My house (clean and) pure for those who go around it (in a ritual of ´Tawwaf´), those who confine themselves there (to worship in seclusion), and those who bow down and prostrate (before Allah)
2|126|And (remember that) Ibraheem prayed, "My Lord, make this land a peaceful and tranquil place. Provide its residents _ those of them who believe in Allah and the Last Day _ with (the means of) livelihood and (plentiful) fruits (and benefits of peace). Allah said, "I will let even the one who disbelieves and denies, enjoy (life) for a brief while. Then, I will thrust him into the torment of the fire!" It is the worst of the destinations
2|127|As Ibraheem _ and with him, his son Ismail _ raised the foundation of the House of Worship, he prayed, "Our Lord, accept this (deed) from us. Indeed, You hear all and you know all
2|128|Our lord! Let us submit and be Your obedient servants. Let our offspring submit and be Your obedient nation. Show us the rites and the ways (to worship You). Accept our repentance! Indeed, (Lord), You it is Who accepts repentance; and You are the most Merciful
2|129|Our Lord, raise a messenger among our offspring, who would recite to them Your revelation. (A messenger) who would teach them the scriptures and the wisdom, and would purify them. Indeed, You are the Mightiest and the Wisest
2|130|And who can forsake (or ignore) the creed of Ibraheem, unless he wants to make a fool of himself? We certainly chose him (as Our friend) in his life of this world, and of course in the life to come, He will be among the righteous
2|131|When his Lord said to him, "Surrender", he responded (promptly), "I submit to the Lord of the universe
2|132|Ibraheem left instructions for his sons _ and so did Yaqub (for his sons) _ saying, "Oh my sons! Allah has certainly chosen the true religion for you. So, be sure that you do not die unless you were an obedient _ (lit: a muslim) _ servant (of your Lord)
2|133|In fact, do you not bear witness yourself that when death came to Yaqub, he asked his sons, "Whom will you worship after I am gone?" They said, "We will worship (Allah), your God! The God of your forefathers Ibraheem, Ismail, and Ishaque! The One (and only) God. To Him, we submit
2|134|That generation has now passed. For them, is what they earned. Yours shall (only) be what you will earn. You will not be asked about what they used to do
2|135|They say, "Become the Jews, or become the Christians, and (only then) you will be guided." (Oh prophet), tell them, "(We would) rather follow the creed of Ibraheem, who was the exclusive devotee (of Allah). He was not among those who set up others as equal to Allah
2|136|(Oh believers)! say, "We believe in Allah and the revelation sent to us, as well as the revelation sent towards Ibraheem, Ismail, Ishaque, Yaqub and the tribes. (We believe in) that which was given to Musa and Jesus, and (also) that which was given to (other) prophets by their Lord. We do not discriminate against any of them. To Him, we have surrendered completely
2|137|They are rightly guided, if their belief is identical to that of yours. But, if they turn away, then of course, they are (opposed to it and) in dissension. On your behalf, Allah will be sufficient against them. He hears-all and knows-all
2|138|(Imbue) the hue (and the halo) of Allah! What better shade of color to acquire than that of Allah? We are His sincere devotees
2|139|(Tell them), "Are you going to argue with us concerning Allah? He is our Lord, and your Lord! We have our deeds, and you have yours to account for. We have devoted ourselves (exclusively) to Him
2|140|Or do you claim that Ibraheem, Ismail, Ishaque, and the tribes were Jews? Or were they Christians? Say, "Do you know better, or does Allah? Can anyone be more unjust and evil than he who hides from Allah the proof (which happens to be) in his possession? Allah is not unaware of anything you do
2|141|That generation has now passed. For them, is what they earned. Yours shall (only) be what you will earn. You will not be asked about what they used to do
2|142|The stupid ones among the people will wonder, "What made them (the muslims) face away from the ´Qibla´ they used to turn towards, while praying?" (´Qibla´: the primal center of worship _ the direction to turn to, while praying). Say, "The East and the West belong to Allah. He guides whom He wants to the straight path
2|143|Thus, We have made you a balanced (and upright) nation; so you may be the witness over mankind, and the messenger would be the witness over you. We had designated your previous ´Qibla´ _ (the prayer direction) _ as a test: so as to distinguish those of you who follow the messenger, apart from those who turn back on their heels. It was (a choice) difficult (and daunting), except for those whom Allah guided. Allah is not the One to let your faith go to waste. Allah is certainly full of kindness and mercy for mankind
2|144|(Now) We have seen your face turning eagerly (and repeatedly) towards the heaven (for guidance). So, We will divert you (away from the present ´Qibla´) and let you switch to the ´Qibla´ of your liking. (Henceforth, while praying), turn to face the direction of the sacred mosque (at Makkah). Those given the scriptures (earlier) do definitely know that indeed, it is the truth from your Lord. Allah is not unaware of what they do
2|145|The people of the book will surely not adopt (or honor) your ´Qibla´ even if you brought them all the signs. You are not going to adopt their ´Qibla´ either. Nor do they, (the Christians and the Jews), adopt each other´s ´Qibla´. You would certainly be the evildoer if you followed their whims and wishes, despite the fact that (true) knowledge has definitely come to you
2|146|They, to whom We gave the scriptures (earlier), recognize it (and him, Muhammad SAW,_ the message and the messenger), just like they recognize their own children. The fact is, a faction of them knowingly hides the truth
2|147|(That is) the truth from your Lord! So, do not be among those who doubt
2|148|Each one has an aim (the revered ideal), the direction he turns to (and pursues). Excel one another, and hasten towards the righteous deeds, (the moral imperative)! Wherever you may be, Allah will bring you out and gather you all together. Allah is capable of doing everything
2|149|No matter where you might be (at the time of prayer), turn your face in the direction of the sacred mosque (at Makkah). That definitely is the truth from your Lord. Allah is not unaware of anything you do
2|150|Wherever you are (at the time of prayer), turn your face in the direction of the sacred mosque (at Makkah). Wherever you might be, turn your face towards it, so that except for the evildoers, people would not have any cause to argue against you. And do not fear the evildoers; fear Me! Because, I will complete (and conclude) My blessings upon you, so that you would be guided aright
2|151|Just like We sent a messenger to you! (A messenger) who recites to you Our revelations, purifies you, and teaches you the book and the wisdom _ (an answer to Ibraheem´s prayers). He teaches you that, which you did not know
2|152|You remember Me, and I shall remember you! Offer your thanks to Me, and do not (ever) be ungrateful
2|153|Oh you who believe! Seek help through patience and prayer, (the ´salat´). Indeed, Allah is with those who are steadfast
2|154|Do not say, "They are dead!" about those slain in the path of Allah. In fact, they are alive! You just cannot (in this life) perceive (that life)
2|155|We will most certainly put you through the test with a taste of fear and famine, the loss of assets and life, and the loss of crops (and products). Give the good news to the steadfast (those who show fortitude)
2|156|Those who exclaim when calamity strikes, "Surely, to Allah we belong! And surely, towards Him we will return
2|157|Such are they! The blessings and mercy of their Lord are upon them. They are the rightly guided ones
2|158|Of course, the (hills of) ´safa´ and ´Marwa´ are among the symbols of Allah. Anyone who goes on Hajj (the pilgrimage), or the ´umrah´ (the visit), to the house (of Allah) may perform the ritual of running to and fro between these hills. There is no sin in that. It is better to perform this (ritual) on purpose. Allah knows the grateful ones; He is the all-Knowing
2|159|Indeed, Allah has cursed _ and others entitled to curse also curse _ those who hide the proofs and the guidance We have revealed; (especially) since We explained to the people so clearly in the scriptures
2|160|Except for those who repent, mend their ways, and openly assert (the truth); towards them, I will relent. I accept repentance, and (I am) the most Merciful
2|161|In fact, all of them _ Allah, the angels, and the human beings _ curse those who disbelieve, and die as disbelievers
2|162|They will stay cursed (in hell) forever. Never will their torment be relieved, nor will they have a reprieve
2|163|Your God is only One, (Allah). There is no god but He, the most Merciful, the most Beneficent
2|164|Indeed, (there are signs) in the creation of the heavens and the earth, in the contrast and alternation of the night and the day, and in the ships that sail through the ocean carrying benefits for mankind. (There are also signs) in the rain water Allah sends down from the sky. With it, He revives the dead (and barren) land back to life. He scatters all sorts of animals across the land. (There are signs) in the shifting and drifting of the winds and the clouds. They are (pressed into service and) held afloat between the sky and the earth. Very definitely, there are (all these) signs for a nation that reflects
2|165|Yet, some people setup others, besides Allah, as His equals (and rivals); and they love those beings, as only Allah should be loved. (On the other hand) the believers are most ardent in their love for Allah. If the evil doers could only see (now) the torment that they would (for sure) see (on the Day of Judgment)! The power and might of all kinds belong solely to Allah; and Allah is very Severe in (inflicting) punishment
2|166|As they see the torment, those (leaders of the unbelievers) who led others would disown (any liability for the sins of) their followers. Their ties (of fraternity and fellowship) would thus break off
2|167|Then, the followers would (regretfully) remark, "If we only had a second chance, we would rid ourselves of them just like they wash their hands of us (today)." In this manner, Allah will display their deeds to them as a source of bitter regret and remorse. Never shall they emerge from the fire
2|168|Oh mankind! Eat the lawful and wholesome (food) that exists on the earth. Do not follow in the footsteps of Shaitan. Indeed, he is the professed enemy of yours
2|169|What he bids you to do is evil, (sinister) and sinful; and (he bids you) to say about Allah that, which you do not know
2|170|When they are asked to follow that which Allah has revealed, they say, "No! We would rather follow the path that we found our forefathers pursuing." Even if their forefathers understood nothing? (Even if) they were misguided
2|171|The example of the unbelievers _ (An advice to them, is like a bleat to a sheep) _ is that of a shepherd calling a flock. They (the sheep, and so also the unbelievers) hear nothing but shrieks and shouts. They are deaf, dumb and blind. They do not understand (a thing)
2|172|Oh you who believe! Eat the wholesome things that We have granted you as sustenance. Show your gratitude to Allah, if it is He (alone) Whom you worship
2|173|What He has forbidden you (to eat) are dead animals, blood, the flesh of swine, and anything (slaughtered and) offered in any other name except that of Allah. But there is no sin if one is compelled by dire circumstances (to eat the forbidden food), provided it is not out of habit or rebellion. Indeed, Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
2|174|There are those who conceal (from mankind) what Allah has revealed in the book. In return, they accept a paltry price _ (a pittance, the worldly gain). In fact, they stuff their bodies with nothing less than the fire. (On the Day of Judgment) Allah will not speak to them, and He will not cleanse them (of their sins). There is a painful punishment for them
2|175|They are the ones who bought misguidance in place of guidance, and (chose) torment instead of forgiveness. How daringly defiant! They readily risked the fire (of hell)
2|176|This is so, despite the fact that Allah has certainly revealed the book with the absolute truth. Of course, those who dispute the book have dissented (and strayed) far away
2|177|Piety is not (a ritual requiring) that you turn your faces towards the East or the West (during ´salat´). Rather, pious is he who believes (firmly) in Allah, the last day, the angels, the scriptures, and the prophets. (Pious is he, who) spends his wealth (in charity) _ out of love for Him _ on his kinsfolk, the orphans, the poor, and the wayfarer. (Pious is the one who) gives (help) to those who ask (for help), and (spends money) to free slaves. And (pious are those who) establish ´salat´, pay the ´zakat´, and fulfill the pledges made by them. Those who endure and display fortitude during poverty and adversity, and during times of crises. Such are the people who are sincere! Such are the pious ones
2|178|´Qisas´ _ (just retribution and blood money) _ is prescribed to you in cases involving (manslaughter and) murder. (If) the free man (murders), then (that) free man (should be charged). If a slave, then (that) slave, and if a woman, then (that) woman. (The offender alone and no one else is accountable). If the offender receives forgiveness from the victim´s brother (and guardian), then compliance of (the rules of) blood money and a fair award to the victim´s family is obligatory. This is the relief (and a reprieve) from your Lord. A mercy (from Him)! There is the painful punishment for anyone who transgresses after that
2|179|Oh people endowed with (knowledge and) insight! (The principle of) ´Qisas´ embodies (the gift of) life for you! Perhaps, you would adopt piety
2|180|You are being instructed. If death approaches any of you and he leaves behind wealth, then let him draw up a will in a fair manner, and let him bequeath his belongings to his parents and kinsfolk. That is an obligation upon the pious
2|181|Later on, if the one who hears the will falsifies it, then (of course) the one who changes the will shall incur the sin. Of course Allah hears all, and knows all
2|182|But the one who, fearing that the testator had sinned and veered off (the just course), corrects and adjusts the will, incurs no sin. Allah is the most Forgiving, the most Merciful
2|183|Oh you who believe! Fasting is prescribed for you just as it was prescribed for those before you. Perhaps you would attain piety
2|184|(Fasting is obligatory for) a certain number of specified days. But if any of you is sick or on a journey, then the same number of other days (may be substituted). The one who suffers hardship (because of fasting) may (redeem himself and) feed a needy person. If he, of his own accord, does better (and feeds more than one person), then he would do so for his own good. However, it is much better for you to fast, if you only knew
2|185|Ramadhan is the month during which the Qur´an was revealed. It is (not only) the guidance for mankind, (but is also) the self-evident proof of (the truth of) that guidance, and (it is) the criterion (of the right and the wrong conduct). Whoever among you lives to see that month, must observe fasts (during that month). Whoever among you is sick or on a journey, (must fast) the same number of other days. Allah wants to make matters easy for you; He does not want to impose hardships on you. So complete the period (of fasting). Glorify Allah (and thank Him) for the guidance He has granted. Perhaps, you would be grateful
2|186|And when My servants ask about Me (tell them that) in fact, I am (always) nearby. I answer the prayers and pleas of the callers when they implore Me. Therefore, they should submit to Me and believe in Me. Perhaps, they would be led along the right path
2|187|It is permissible for you to approach your wives (sexually) during the night of the fasting (day). They are (like) your garments _ (close to you: they clothe your nakedness, and your passions) _ and you are (like) their garments. Of course, Allah knows that you (had succumbed to desire and) were cheating yourself (by engaging in sexual activity during the nights of fasting). He has accepted your repentance and has pardoned you. Now, you may have (social and sexual) relations with your wives (during the night of fasting). Seek from their company that _ (peace and progeny) _ which Allah has ordained for you. (You may) eat and drink until the white streak (of dawn) becomes visible (on the horizon) against the darkness. Thereafter, complete the fast till nightfall. Do not have (sexual) contact with your wives when you confine yourself in a mosque (to worship). These are the bounds of Allah. Do not approach them (much less exceed them). Thus, Allah makes His revelations manifestly clear for mankind. Perhaps, you would fear (Allah) and attain piety
2|188|Do not usurp each other´s possessions unfairly _ by foul means and fraud. Do not, knowingly and sinfully, give (bribes, or false) statements to a judge (or others in authority, intending) to usurp the (rights and) possessions of others
2|189|They ask you about the (cyclical changes in the) moon. Say, "It serves as a calendar for mankind, and to mark the time for pilgrimage." Piety is not (a ritual requiring) that you enter your home through its rear. Piety is to (know and) fear Allah. Enter your homes through its front door, and fear Allah. Perhaps, you would prosper
2|190|In the path of Allah, fight those who wage a war against you. But do not exceed the limit. Indeed, Allah does not like the transgressors
2|191|Kill them wherever you find them. Expel them from where they drove you away. Persecution and oppression are worse than killing. Do not do battle with them near the sacred house of worship (Makkah), unless it is they who engage you in battle there. If they fight you there, then slay them (there). That is the due punishment for the disbelievers
2|192|If they desist, then of course Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
2|193|Fight (and confront) them till corruption and repression cease, and until faith in Allah (and justice) prevails! But if they desist, then let there be no aggression, except against the oppressors
2|194|The sacred months are (of course) the sacred months. (But) there is retribution for (the violation of) every prohibition. Therefore, if they violate the prohibition (and attack you), then you may do the same in retaliation against the aggression they commit. But, know (for sure) that Allah is indeed with the pious
2|195|Spend your wealth for the cause of Allah. Do not, by your own doings, put yourself in harm´s way. Do the right thing. Of course, Allah loves the righteous
2|196|Carry out and conclude (the rites of) Hajj _ (the pilgrimage), or the ´umrah´ _ (the visit); do so for the sake of Allah. If you are held back (by circumstances), then make an offering you can afford with ease. Do not shave off your head (the last of the rituals of Hajj or Umrah) till the offering has reached its destination. The one who is sick, or suffers from an affliction of the scalp, may redeem himself by fasting, giving alms, or making an offering. When you are safe (and in Makkah), and anyone wishes to perform the ´umrah´ before (it is time for) Hajj, he should make an offering he can afford with ease. But if he cannot afford to make an offering, he should fast three days during Hajj, and seven days when he returns (home). That makes ten days of fasting in all. This applies to the one whose family is not present at the Holy house of worship. Fear Allah, and know (for sure) that Allah is indeed very severe in (inflicting) punishment
2|197|The month of Hajj (is specified and fixed, and) is well known. Whoever decides to perform Hajj (must visit the sacred House) during that month (and) must abstain from sexual relations. He must abstain from wickedness, and wrangling of all sorts. Allah knows whatever good you do. For your journey, pack and carry along with you the provisions and supplies. (However), the best provision to bring along is piety. Fear Me, oh men of reason (and intellect)
2|198|You incur no sin if you seek the bounties of your Lord (by trading during pilgrimage). When you leave the plains of ´Arafat´ in multitudes, remember (and glorify) Allah (a lot) near the sacred ground of ´Mushar´. Remember Him as (much as) He has guided you. Prior to this, you were certainly unguided
2|199|Then, move along with the multitude of people moving along. Seek the forgiveness of Allah. Indeed, Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
2|200|Again, when you have concluded the rites of Hajj, remember (and glorify) Allah like you used to remember your forefathers; in fact, even more than that _ (and with a greater zeal). Among people are those who say, "Our Lord, grant us your bounties in this life." Such ones shall have no part (of the blessings) in the life-to-come
2|201|Among people are some who say, "Grant us the blessings in this life, as well as the blessings in the life-to-come, and save us from the torment of hell
2|202|Such people shall have their due share of blessings (in this life as well as the life to come) according to what they have earned. Allah is very swift in settling accounts
2|203|Remember Allah (a lot) during the specified days (in ´Mina´). Then, whoever hastens back (home) after just a couple of days, commits no offense. The one who stays longer does not incur any sin, provided he stays in piety. Fear Allah and know (for sure) that before Him you will all be (summoned and) gathered together
2|204|Among people are the likes of the ones whose suave talk about this world charms and astounds you. He (professes good intentions and) invokes Allah as the witness over what exists in his heart. But (in reality) he is the most dogged and quarrelsome opponent
2|205|When he prevails, he eagerly expends his energy in spreading mischief and corruption in the world; he destroys harvest and the human race. Allah does not like corruption
2|206|Whenever he is told, ´Fear Allah´, his vanity (holds him back and) keeps him staunch and steady on (the road to) sin. For him, hell shall suffice! How wretched is that resting-place
2|207|Among people are also those, who would willingly sell themselves out of the desire to please Allah. And of course, Allah is full of compassion for (His) servants
2|208|Oh you who believe! Submit to peace, the religion of Islam, fully (unreservedly) and unconditionally. Do not follow in the footsteps of Shaitan. Indeed, he is the (professed and) manifest enemy of yours
2|209|The clear proofs have already come to you. Despite that, if you lapse and stumble (into disobedience and disbelief), then know (for sure) that Allah is the Mightiest and the Wisest
2|210|Now, what they await is nothing more than for Allah Himself _ and the angels _ to come to them through the cover of clouds, and settle the matter with certainty. All matters are referred to Allah (for decisions)
2|211|(Just) ask the children of Israel, how many clear signs have We displayed to them. Whoever changes the mercy of Allah (into misery) after it reaches him, (will find that) Allah is indeed very severe in inflicting punishment
2|212|The (temporal) life of this world has been made attractive and adorable for the unbelievers. So they scoff (and poke fun) at those who believe. On the day of resurrection, far superior to them would be those who fear (Allah, and are dutiful). Allah gives (the provisions) without any limit to whom He pleases
2|213|Mankind was all a single community (with a single faith). Then, (they differed and so) Allah raised prophets (among them) as bearers of good news, and as warners. He also revealed to them the scripture containing the truth, so it may settle matters about which people had differed among themselves. They did not (splinter and) differ until after the manifest proofs had already come to them; (and they differed) because of mutual hatred (and jealousy). Then, by His leave, Allah guided the believers towards the truth concerning all matters in which they had differed. Allah guides to the straight path whomever He wants
2|214|Did you think that you would enter paradise (without a test)? You have not yet faced the kind of trials that the people in the past _ (the believers) _ had to undergo. They were afflicted with (bitter) adversity aqnd suffering. They were shaken up so severely (by the trial) that the prophets and the believers who followed them, cried out, "Where is Allah´s help?" (They were told), "Yes! The help of Allah is close by
2|215|They ask you as to what (and on whom) should they spend. Say, "Whatever good you do (and the money you spare) should (first) be for your parents and the near ones, and (then) for the orphans, the needy and the wayfarers. Indeed, Allah knows well whatever good you do
2|216|Warfare (for the sake of Allah) has been ordained for you, though it is not something you like. It is possible that the thing you detest might just (turn out to) be good for you. It is possible that the thing you like (the most) might in reality be bad for you. Allah knows (all) while you know nothing (at all)
2|217|They ask you about warfare during the sacred month. Say, "Fighting during the sacred month is serious (offense). But according to Allah, far worse is preventing people from the path of Allah, rejecting Him and (blocking access to) the sacred House of worship, and the ousting of its occupants. Corruption (and oppression) is (far) more serious than bloodshed. They will not cease to engage you in combat, till they turn you away from your faith, if they (ever) can. Those who abandon the (true) faith and die as unbelievers, would lose (the worth of) all their (good) deeds in this world and the life-to-come. They are the inmates of the fire, and there, they shall abide forever
2|218|(Conversely), those who believe, and those who migrate and strive hard for the sake of Allah, actually (deserve and) look forward to Allah´s mercy. And (of course) Allah is the most Forgiving, and the most Merciful
2|219|They ask you about the alcoholic drinks and the games of chance (the gambling). Say, "Both of them carry a lot of sin, and (also) have a little benefit for mankind. But the sin (inherent) in them far exceeds their benefits. They ask you as to what they should spend (in the path of Allah)? Say, "Whatever you can spare!" Allah makes His commands clear to you. Perhaps you will reflect
2|220|(You may ponder) about (the transient nature of) this life, and (the permanence of) the life-to-come! They ask you about the orphans. Say, "The best (conduct) is to better (their conduct and condition). If you allow your affairs (and assets) to mingle, then of course they are your brethren. Allah knows well the one who (spoils and) covets, and also the one who improves (and reforms). He could have imposed a hardship on you. Indeed, Allah is the most Powerful and the Wisest
2|221|(Oh believers), do not marry the unbelieving idolatrous women, unless they believe. A believing slave girl is better than any polytheist woman, no matter how pleasing (and appealing) she may seem to you. Do not marry (your daughters to) the idolatrous men unless they believe. A believing slave is better than a polytheist man, no matter how appealing he may appear to you. They call you towards the fire, while Allah invites you towards paradise and forgiveness by His leave. He makes His verses clear for the people. Perhaps you would bear in mind
2|222|They ask you about menstruation. Say, "It is a vulnerable (and unclean) condition. So, keep away from (having sexual intercourse with) your women during menstruation. Do not approach them till they are (off their period and) clean. Once they have (bathed and) cleansed themselves, you can then come to them as Allah has ordained you to do. Indeed Allah loves those who turn to Him constantly, and He loves those who maintain a clean state (of being)
2|223|Your wives are (like) your plowing fields; so enter (and cultivate) your fields in any manner you wish. And (first) send ahead (a prayer) for yourself. Fear Allah (always), and be sure that you (all) shall meet Him (one day). Give the glad tidings to the believers
2|224|Do not let your oaths in Allah´s name be an excuse against your doing good _ acting piously, and keeping peace between people. And Allah is the all-Hearing and the all-Knowing
2|225|Allah will not hold you accountable for your (unwitting and) idle oaths, but He will surely hold you accountable for the oaths that your hearts desire (and assert in earnest). And Allah is the most Forgiving, and the most Forbearing
2|226|Those who swear to sever (sexual) relations with their wives, have to wait four months. If they change their mind (during this period) then, (of course) Allah is the most Forgiving, and the most Merciful
2|227|And (after that period) if they are (still) firm upon (their decision to) divorce, then Allah is the all hearing, and the all-Knowing
2|228|Divorced women must wait (and remain single) _ for a period of three menstrual cycles. It is not permissible for them to conceal that, (the life,) which Allah has planted in the womb, if they believe in Allah and the Last Day. During this period, their husbands have the right to take them back, in case they desire reconciliation. Women have their rights, similar to the rights over them, which are well known. Of course, men are (as regards rights and responsibilities) a notch above women. And Allah is the most Powerful, and the Wisest
2|229|Divorce can only be (revoked) twice. After that, the divorced woman must be retained with honor (and love) or allowed to leave with (kindness and) grace. It is not permissible for you to take back anything you had given to her, except when (divorce occurs because) the two of them fear that they might not be able to abide by the bounds of Allah. If you fear that the two of you may not be able to stay within the bounds of Allah, then there is no sin upon either of you if she gives back something to gain her freedom. These are the bounds of Allah. Do not transgress them. Those who overstep the bounds of Allah are indeed the evildoers
2|230|If he divorces her (for the third time), then she shall be unlawful for him thereafter, unless she weds another man and he (too) divorces her. (In that case), there is no sin upon the two if they come together (in wedlock), provided they think that they can observe (and stay within) the bounds of Allah. These are the bounds of Allah, and He expounds them for the nation that understands
2|231|After you divorce your wife and she completes the (prescribed) term, then either hold her back (in wedlock) amicably or let her leave honorably. Do not hold her in order to hurt (or harass) her, else you would transgress (the bounds of Allah). Whoever does that commits an outrage upon himself. Do not take the laws of Allah as a jest (or treat them frivolously). Remember the favors of Allah upon you, and the scriptures and the wisdom He has revealed to you. It instructs you (towards the right path). So, be (devoted and) dutiful towards Allah and be sure that indeed Allah knows every single thing
2|232|Once you have divorced your wives and they have completed the prescribed term (of waiting), then do not prevent them from taking (other prospective) husbands. (The two may wed) in an accepted manner, provided there is a mutual consent. The one who believes in Allah and the Day of Judgment is (hereby) being admonished. It is closer to piety, and closer to purity. Allah knows it (all), and you know nothing (at all)
2|233|The (divorced) mother shall nurse her children for two full years, if he (the father) wants the suckling period completed. The father must bear her living expenses _ the cost of food and clothing in an accepted manner. No one should be burdened more than one´s ability to bear. Let the mother not suffer (unduly) because of her child, nor the father on account of his child. The heirs carry the same liability (as that of the father). There is no harm if both (parents), after mutual consultation and consent, want the infant weaned. There is (also) no harm if you decide to hire a wet-nurse to suckle the child, provided you pay her what is due in an accepted manner. Fear Allah, and know (for sure) that Allah (vigilantly) watches over everything you do
2|234|The surviving widows of the deceased among you, must remain unmarried for a period of four months and ten days. After they complete their (prescribed) term (they are free to decide their future); you bear no sin for anything they do with themselves in an accepted manner. Allah is well aware of everything you do
2|235|You bear no sin if you drop a hint to those (widowed) women of marriage proposal, or keep (such thoughts) to yourself. Allah knows that naturally you would think about them. But do not engage in a secret tryst; do not go beyond uttering the generally recognized remark. Definitely, do not contract (or consummate) marriage in secret before the prescribed period of waiting is over. Know it (for sure) that indeed Allah knows whatever is in your heart. So fear Him, and know (for sure) that Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
2|236|You bear no sin if you divorce your wives before having (a sexual) contact (with them), and before settling (the amount of) the nuptial premium (for them). Yet, you should make provisions for them (even then); the affluent in keeping with his means, and the poor according to what he can afford. A fair provision is an obligation upon the pious
2|237|And if you divorce your wives before having (sexual) contact, but after settling (the amount of) the nuptial premium, then you are liable to pay half of the stipulated amount. (However), there is no harm if the woman gives up her half, or (there is no harm if the groom,) the one who is responsible for tying the wedding knot (pays the full amount and) waives his half. (For the groom) to forgo (his half) is closer to piety. But do not (forgo or) forget to show courtesy (and kindness) to one another. Indeed, Allah (vigilantly) watches everything you do
2|238|Mind the ´salat´ (meticulously), and perform the ´salat´ (especially the middle one) in excellence _ (with concentration and care). Stand before Allah with devotion
2|239|(During war and emergency) if you (are in a state of) fear, then (perform the ´salat´) standing up, (walking), or on horseback. Then, as soon as you have peace, remember Allah in the manner He has taught you _ which you (previously) did not know
2|240|Those among you who face death and leave behind widows, should bequeath to them the living expenses for (at least) a year, as well as the residence. (However) you bear no sin if they leave on their own, to pursue whatever they want in an accepted manner. Allah is Almighty, and all-Wise
2|241|The divorced woman has a right to a reasonable livelihood; and (to provide) it is an obligation upon the pious
2|242|Thus, Allah clearly explains His revelation to you, so that you would understand
2|243|Are you not aware of (the fate of) those who, because of the fear of death, fled their homes in thousands. Allah said to them, "Die!" Then He restored them back to life. Indeed, Allah is full of kindness and grace for mankind. But most of the people do not offer thanks
2|244|Fight for the cause of Allah, and know (for sure) that Allah is all-Hearing, and all-Knowing
2|245|Is there any one among you who would lend Allah a (handsome) virtuous loan, so He may multiply it many times for you? Allah it is, Who ceases or eases (your livelihood, and your earnings). Before Him, you shall all be made to return
2|246|Are you not aware of the (undue demands of the) leaders of the Israelites after Musa? They said to their prophet, "Assign (and enthrone) someone as our king, so we may fight for the cause of Allah." (The Prophet) said, "Might it happen that you would (hesitate and) fail to fight, if fighting was actually prescribed for you?" They replied, "Is anything wrong with us? Why would we not fight for the cause of Allah? We, and our children, have been driven out of our homes!" Yet, except a few, they all turned away when fighting was actually ordained for them. Allah is very well aware of the evil doers
2|247|The Prophet said to them, "Indeed, Allah has raised Talut (Saul) to be your king." They replied, "Why does he get to be the king? Compared to him, we have a better (and more rightful) claim to be the king. He does not abound in wealth and riches!" (The Prophet) said, "In fact, Allah preferred him to you; He has excelled him in knowledge, (strength), and stature. Allah entrusts His kingdom to whomever He wills. Allah is the Infinite, the all-Knowing
2|248|And their Prophet said to them, "In fact, (you will receive) the sign of (the divine endorsement of) his kingship: (during his reign) a wooden ark will fall into your hands. (It will have) a reassuring peace from your Lord, and the relics and remains of the family of Musa, and the family of Haroon. The angels will carry it to you. Indeed, that shall be the definite sign for you, if you are the believers
2|249|When Talut set out (on a mission) with his army, he said, "Allah is surely going to put you through a test by the river. Whoever drinks (and quenches his thirst with) the water from the river shall not be (a devotee of) mine. Truly, (a follower of) mine would be the one who avoids the taste of the water from the river, save a sip or two out of the hollow of his hand." But, except for a few, they all drank the water from the river. When Talut, and those who believed in him, crossed (the river), the others said, "We do not have any strength left today against Goliath and his armies." Those who were certain about meeting their Lord, replied, "How often has it been that a smaller group prevailed over a much larger group, by Allah´s leave?" And Allah is certainly with the patient ones
2|250|As they advanced to confront Goliath and his forces, they implored (Allah), "Our Lord! Pour on us (a generous helping of) patience, plant our feet firmly and give us victory over the nation of unbelievers
2|251|By Allah´s leave, they routed the unbelievers. Da´ood killed Goliath and Allah granted Da´ood the Kingdom and the wisdom, and taught him what He wished. This world would be full of (corruption and) chaos, had Allah not arranged to dislodge (and rid) one set of people by another. Allah is full of kindness and grace for the entire universe
2|252|(Oh Muhammad, SAW), We recite to you the revelation of Allah with the absolute truth. Of course, you are the messenger sent (by Us)
2|253|We have excelled (and preferred) some of the messengers over others. To some of them, Allah spoke (directly). He raised some to higher degrees (of honor) than others. We granted the manifest proofs to Jesus, son of Mary, and We strengthened him with the Holy Spirit _ (the angel Gibrael). Had Allah wished, those who followed the prophets, would not have fought each other, (especially) since they had seen the clear proofs. But they differed (and splintered into groups): some of them believed, while there were some of them who disbelieved. Had Allah wished, they would not have fought (each other). But Allah does what He wants
2|254|Oh you who believe! Spend (in Our way) out of the wealth We have bestowed upon you, before that day arrives. (Fear that day) when there shall be neither trade, nor friendships, and nor (even) a mediation (to save you). The unbelievers are really the evil doers
2|255|Allah! There is no god but He! He is the Eternal and the Ever-living! Neither drowsiness, nor sleep ever seizes Him! Everything in the heavens and everything on the earth belongs to Him. Who can dare intercede in His presence except by His leave? He knows everything that lies ahead of them and everything that is behind them. They shall never know anything about Him except what He wills. His chair _ (His authority and influence, His domain and command) _ extends over the heavens and the earth. Preserving and protecting them does not tire (or burden) Him (in the least). He is the most High, the Greatest
2|256|There is no compulsion (and coercion) in religion. The right (and the upright) has been sifted (and marked out clearly) from the wrong (and the ruinous). Whoever defies the forces of evil and believes in Allah, has indeed latched on to a safe and secure grip. It will not snap or split. Allah is the all-Hearing and the all-Knowing
2|257|Allah is the friend and patron of those who believe. He brings them out of the depths of darkness into light. While those who do not believe, have the forces of evil as their friends; they lead them out of light, into the very depths of darkness. Such ones shall be the inmates of the fire. They will stay there forever
2|258|Are you not aware of the person _ (the emperor)_ who argued with Ibraheem about his Lord, (simply) because Allah had granted him an empire. Ibraheem said to him, "My Lord is the One Who grants life and gives death." (The emperor) said, "I, too, give life and death." Ibraheem said, "In fact, Allah it is, Who causes the sun to rise from the east. You cause it to rise from the west (if you can)." Thus, the one who disbelieved was left perplexed and speechless. Allah does not guide the nation of wrong doers
2|259|Just as the case of the man who passed by (the ruins of) a town that lay upside down on its roofs. He said (to himself), "How will Allah bring the people of this town back to life after death?" Thereby, Allah let him die (and stay dead) for a hundred years. Then, He brought him back to life and asked him, "How long did you stay (dead)?" The man replied, "I stayed a day or perhaps a part of it." (Allah) said, "In fact, you have stayed (in this state) a hundred years. Look at your food and your drink. It hasn´t become stale at all. Now, look at your donkey. We will turn you into a sign for (other) people. Look at the bones and watch how We gather them all together; then watch how We clothe them with flesh." As the reality became evident to him, he remarked,"I know now that Allah is capable of doing all things
2|260|And (remember) when Ibraheem said, "My Lord, (would you) show me how you will raise the dead back to life?" (Allah) said, "Do you not believe?" (Ibraheem) said, "(I ask) so my heart may rest assured." (Allah) said, "Take four birds, and (tame and) train them to (respond to) your call. Then, (cut them up and) place each piece on a (different) mountain. Then call them. They will (respond and) come to you in a hurry. Know (and be sure) that Allah is indeed the most Powerful, and the Wisest
2|261|The example of those who spend their wealth in the path of Allah, is that of a kernel (of corn). Each seed (when sown) grows seven ears of corn. Each ear has a hundred kernels in it. Allah increases (the good deed) manifolds for whomever He wants. Allah is the Infinite, the most Aware
2|262|Those who spend their wealth in the path of Allah _ (provided) they do not, afterwards, inflict abuse (on the recipients of charity) by bragging and boasting about their generosity _ shall have their reward with their Lord. They shall not have any fear, nor shall they ever grieve
2|263|A kind and courteous word and forgiveness is (much) better than the charity, that is followed by (such an emotional) abuse. Allah is free of all wants, and the most Forbearing
2|264|Oh you who believe! Do not mar (and void) your charity by stressing your generosity, and by inflicting (emotional) abuse. Do not be like those who spend their wealth (in charity) solely to be seen _ (to gain public esteem). They neither believe in Allah nor in the life-to-come. Their example is that of the boulder covered by a thin layer of topsoil. When a rainstorm strikes, (the topsoil washes off and) the rock is left bare. They won´t be able to benefit from the good deeds they earn. Allah does not guide the nation of unbelievers
2|265|(On the other hand) the example of those who spend their wealth seeking the acceptance and approval of Allah, and with the certainty of belief (that they would be rewarded), is that of fertile garden on high ground. In case there is a heavy rainfall, its yield doubles. But even light moisture suffices. Allah watches (vigilantly) over everything you do
2|266|Would any of you like to own a fertile garden _ right through which run the rivers _ containing date palms and grape-vines, and yielding all kinds of fruit? But what if, in the old age, and when the children are very young and helpless, that garden is struck and completely scorched by a whirlwind? In this manner, Allah explains clearly to you the revelation. Perhaps, you would ponder
2|267|Oh you who believe, spend (in the path of Allah) the wholesome things you have earned, and the best of the products We bring out from the land for you. Do not pick out the worst and the worthless things to give in charity, which you would yourself accept _ if you do at all _ (reluctantly and) with disdain. Know it (for sure) that Allah is Self-sufficient and Praiseworthy (in His own right)
2|268|Shaitan scares you with (the prospect of) poverty, and bids you to adopt (lewd and) shameless conduct, while Allah promises you His forgiveness and (His) bounties! Allah is the Bounteous, the most Aware
2|269|He grants wisdom to whomever He wants. The one given the wisdom has really been granted an abundant (and enduring) wealth. But only those with insight heed (the advice)
2|270|Allah is certainly well Aware of anything you spend by way of charity, or anything you pledge (to spend) as an offering. The wrong doers do not have any helpers
2|271|It is good if you (give openly and) let your charity be known. But truly excellent it would be, if you give to the poor and let your charity remain a secret. Allah will rid you of your sins! And Allah is very well Aware of everything you do
2|272|It is not upon you to grant them guidance. Allah guides whom He wants! Whatever good (money) you spend is only for your own good. If you spend to seek the pleasure of Allah, then whatever good (money) you spend would be returned to you to the fullest extent. You would not be wronged at all
2|273|(Charity is most appropriate) for those who are impoverished because they are (engaged and engrossed) in the cause of Allah, and are restricted (in their ability to earn). They cannot travel and move about in the world (in search of livelihood). Because of their modesty, those who are ignorant (of their circumstances), consider them well to do. You can recognize them by their features. They do not entreat and beg people for help. Allah is indeed very well Aware of anything you spend (in His cause)
2|274|Those, who spend their wealth (in the way of Allah) during the night and the day, secretly as well as openly, shall have their reward with their Lord. They shall have no fear, nor shall they ever grieve
2|275|(On the Day of Judgment), those who take (the income from) interest and usury would not (be able to) stand straight. (When resurrected), they would stand like a crazed and confounded man _ as if Shaitan had touched and afflicted them. That is because they say, "Usury (and interest) is just like (the profit from) commerce." But Allah has permitted (the profit from) commerce, and He has prohibited interest (and usury). Whoever stops (taking interest) after he receives admonition from his Lord, will not be punished for his past actions. His matter rests with Allah. But those who persist shall be the inmates of the fire. There, they shall stay forever
2|276|Allah makes (the benefits of) interest decline (and dwindle), while He causes the charity to grow (and flourish). Allah dislikes all the unbelievers _ the (ungrateful) sinners
2|277|Of course, those who believe, act righteously, establish ´salat´ and pay the ´zakat´, shall certainly have their reward with Allah. They shall have no fear, nor shall they ever grieve
2|278|Oh you who believe! Fear Allah and write off (all outstanding) interest (due you) that still accrues, if you (really) are the believers
2|279|If you do not do so, then (hear this): Allah and His messenger declare war upon you. If you repent, you are entitled to (receive) the principal amount lent. You should do no wrong, nor should you be wronged
2|280|Grant a delay (to the debtor) if he is up against hard time, until his (financial) situation eases. To waive the debt by way of charity would be better for you, if only you knew
2|281|Fear the day when you will all be gathered before Allah. Then, each person will be paid in full for every single deed he has earned. They will not be wronged (at all)
2|282|Oh you who believe! When you contract a debt for a fixed term, reduce it to writing. Let a scribe record the terms in a fair manner. The scribe whom Allah has taught to write should not refuse to write. He should record (the transaction). The one who incurs the debt should spell out the terms. He should fear Allah and not omit anything. If the borrower lacks understanding, or is feeble (minded), or is otherwise unable to dictate, then his guardian should dictate (the conditions of the loan) in a fair manner. Call upon two of your men to act as witnesses (to the contract). Should two men not be available (to act as witnesses), then take one man and two women _ if one of them errs, the other would remind her _ that are acceptable to you as witnesses. The witnesses should not refuse if called upon to testify. Do not neglect to write down (all) the (specific) terms (and provisions) of the contract, be they small or big. That, according to Allah is a more reliable evidence, and more likely to dispel doubts (and suspicions). You bear no sin if you fail to record the on-the-spot exchange of goods for cash, that goes on between you (all the time). But, take witnesses when you enter into a commercial contract. Do not harass or harm the scribe or the witnesses. It would be wicked and immoral for you to do so. Fear Allah! (Of course) Allah teaches you (righteousness). Allah has full knowledge of every single thing
2|283|If you happen to be traveling, and cannot find a scribe, then you may pledge (or pawn) goods in hand (for cash). If one of you trusts another (with any matter), then he who is trusted should (fulfill his pledge and) discharge the trust faithfully. He should fear Allah, his Lord, and not hide (any of) the evidence. Whoever hides evidence surely has a sinful heart. Allah has full knowledge of every single thing you do
2|284|To Allah belongs everything in the heavens and on earth. Whether you reveal whatever is in your heart or keep it a secret, Allah will call you to account for it. He forgives whom He wills, and He punishes whom He wills. Allah is capable of doing every single thing
2|285|The messenger believes in whatever is revealed to him by his Lord; so do the believers! They all believe in Allah, His angels, (all) His scriptures, and (all) His messengers. (They say), "We do not differentiate between any of His messengers!" And they say, "We hear, and we obey. (We do seek) Your forgiveness, Our lord! And towards You is our journey´s end
2|286|Allah does not burden any soul beyond its endurance. For it is what it earns, and against it is what it commits. "Our Lord, do not condemn us for what we forget, or err. Our Lord, do not levy upon us the (kind of) burden You laid upon those before us. Our Lord, do not impose upon us a burden that is greater than our strength to withstand. Pardon us, grant us forgiveness, and have mercy on us. You are our Protector! Grant us victory over the nation of unbelievers
3|1|Alif, Laam, Meem
3|2|(He is) Allah! There is no god but He, the Ever living, the Eternal
3|3|He revealed to you the book with the truth; it confirms the scriptures that came before it. (It is) He (Who) revealed the Torah and the Gospels
3|4|In the past, as guidance for mankind! (Now) He has revealed the criterion (to discern the truth). For those who reject the signs of Allah, there exists the severest (most awful) torment. Allah is the most Powerful; (He is) the Lord of Revenge
3|5|Indeed, (He is) Allah! Nothing at all on earth _ nor anything in the heavens _ is (ever) hidden from Him
3|6|He it is, Who shapes you in (your mothers´) wombs any way He wills. There is no god but He, the most Powerful, the Wisest
3|7|He it is, Who revealed to you the book. It contains verses that are (decisive and) crystal clear, _ those are the essence and substance of the book _ and others that are allegorical. Those with (malice and) doubt in their hearts, desire to create mischief and go after such allegorical verses. They seek to interpret them (to suit their own preconceived notions). No one knows their real meaning except Allah! Those with sound (well grounded) knowledge say, "We believe in the entire Qur´an. All of it is from our Lord." Actually, those with insight heed the advice
3|8|(They pray), "Our Lord, do not let our hearts go astray, now that You have guided us aright. By Your grace, grant us mercy. Indeed, You are absolutely the very best of the Bestowers
3|9|Our Lord, You will certainly gather all of mankind on the day (of Judgment), about which there is no doubt." Of course, Allah never fails to fulfill His promise
3|10|The wealth, and the children of the unbelievers, will not help them a bit against Allah; and they will become the fuel for the fire
3|11|Like the people of the pharaoh and those before them! They rejected Our signs, so Allah seized them for their sins. Allah is very strict and severe in retribution
3|12|Say to those who denied, "Soon you would be overcome, and gathered in hell. It is the worst of the abode
3|13|You already had a sign in the two armies that met (in the battle of ´Badar´). One army fought for the sake of Allah, while the other was the unbeliever! The believers saw with their eyes that the unbelievers were twice their own numbers. Thus, Allah strengthens with His help whomever He pleases. In that is surely a lesson for those with insight
3|14|The love and passion for (certain) things _ women, offspring, treasures of gold and silver, branded (high bred) horses, cattle, and land _ have been made tempting and alluring for mankind. (However), this is only a brief enjoyment of the life of this world. That which is with Allah, is actually the most excellent abode
3|15|Say, "Shall I tell you about something (far) better than that? For the righteous ones, there exists with their Lord the gardens of paradise, through which run the rivers. There, the believers shall have eternal abodes, immaculate mates, and the acceptance and approval of Allah. And Allah (vigilantly) watches over His created servants
3|16|(The paradise is for) those who say, "Our Lord, we really believe! Forgive our sins, and save us from the suffering of the fire (of hell)
3|17|Such are the steadfast, the obedient _ those who spend (for His sake), and seek His forgiveness in the early hours of the morning
3|18|Allah bears witness _ and so do the angels, and the men of learning _ that there is no god but He. In (perfect) balance does He maintain His creation! There is no god but He, the most Powerful and the Wisest
3|19|Indeed, the (only true) religion according to Allah is Islam _ (submission to His will). Those who formerly received the scriptures sought to oppress one another, and (out of mutual jealousy) disputed each other. (They did so), after (true) knowledge had already come to them. Whoever rejects the signs of Allah, will find that Allah is indeed very swift in calling to accounts
3|20|If they argue with you, say "I and those who follow me, have surrendered our entire beings to Allah." Ask them both: those given the scriptures, as well as the illiterate pagans, "Are you willing to submit (to Allah)?" If they submit, then of course they are the rightly guided. If they turn away, then in fact (the responsibility) upon you is to convey (the message). Allah watches over His created servants
3|21|Give the news of a torturous torment to those who rejected the revelations of Allah, killed the prophets against all right (and reason), and killed others who enjoined just dealings
3|22|Such are the ones whose deeds have lost all their worth in this life, as well as in the life to come. They will have no helpers
3|23|(Oh prophet), haven´t you seen those who were given their share of the scriptures? They are being invited towards the book of Allah so the disputes between them could be settled. But a faction of them turns away (in disbelief) and evades
3|24|That is so because they say, "The fire (of hell) will not touch us, except for a few days." That, which they (forged and) fabricated in their religion, duped them
3|25|So how shall it be when We gather them all on the day (of Judgment), about which there is absolutely no doubt. Then, each person shall receive, to the full extent, the rewards (and consequences) he has earned. They shall not be wronged at all
3|26|Say, "Oh Allah, The Lord and Master of the (divine) empire! You grant the kingdom _ (influence and authority) _ to whomever You wish, and You take away the kingdom from whomever You want. You confer honor upon whom You wish, and You bring dishonor upon whomever You wish. (Nothing but) good occurs by Your hand. Indeed, You have power over all things
3|27|You cause the night to cloak the day, and You make the day dawn over the night. You bring the living out of the dead, and You make the dead emerge from the living. Without any limit or measure, You grant sustenance (and wealth) to whomever You want
3|28|The believers should not take as friends the unbelievers in preference to the believers _ unless they sense (and suspect) harm (and harassment) from the unbelievers. Whoever does that shall have nothing from Allah at all. Allah cautions you to beware of Him! Towards Allah is your final destination
3|29|Say, "Allah knows whatever lies in your hearts, whether you hide it or make it known (to others). He knows everything in the heavens and on earth. Allah has power (and complete control) over all things
3|30|That day, every person will find every single act of righteousness he ever did, as well as every wrong deed he ever committed, presented (before the Lord, as evidence for and against him). He will wish (that day), that there were a long stretch (of space) between him and his bad deeds. Allah cautions you to beware of Him! And Allah is full of Kindness for (His created) servants
3|31|Say, "If you love Allah, then follow me. Allah will love you! And He will forgive your sins. Allah is the most Forgiving, and the most Merciful
3|32|Say, "Obey Allah, and obey the messenger!" But if they turn away (beware), Allah does not like the unbelievers
3|33|Indeed, Allah has (picked and) preferred Adam, Nooh, the family of Ibraheem and the family of the Imran over the entire mankind
3|34|They are from a single line of descent _ (biologically and spiritually). Allah hears-all, and knows-all
3|35|(He heard) when a woman of Imran said, "Oh my Lord, I have indeed pledged to dedicate and consecrate to You that, which is in my womb. So accept this offering from me. Indeed, You are the all-Hearing and the all-Knowing
3|36|When she delivered, she said, "My Lord, I gave birth to a female." Allah was well aware of what she had delivered. The male is not like a female; and (Mary said), "I have named her Mary. I seek Your protection for her and her progeny from the (evil of the) accursed Shaitan
3|37|So, her Lord honored her prayers with a gracious and generous acceptance. He made her grow up to be a virtuous (woman), and entrusted her to the care of Zakariah. Whenever Zakariah visited her in the sanctuary, he found her well supplied with food. He would ask, "Oh Mary! Where did you get this?" She said, "This is from Allah. Indeed Allah provides unrestricted sustenance to whomever He wants
3|38|Right then, Zakariah prayed to his Lord saying, "My Lord, grant me by Your grace a virtuous son. Indeed, You are the One Who hears the prayers
3|39|As he stood for ´salat´ in his chamber, angels called him, "Allah gives you the news of a son called Yahya (John), who would confirm the word from Allah. He will be notably noble, absolutely chaste, (pure and virtuous), and a righteous prophet
3|40|(Zakariah) said, "My Lord, how can I have a son? Old age has overcome me, and my wife is infertile. (Allah) said, "Precisely so! Allah does what He wants
3|41|(Zakariah) said, "My Lord, appoint a (premonetary) sign for me." (Allah) said, "Your sign is that you will not (be able to) speak to people for three days, except by gestures. So, remember your Lord a lot (during that period), and glorify (your Lord) in the afternoons and in the mornings
3|42|And (remember) when the angels said to Mary, "Oh Mary! Indeed Allah picked and purified you, and preferred you over all the women of the world
3|43|Oh Mary! (With devotion and humility), submit to your Lord. Prostrate and bow down (before Him) along with those who bow down
3|44|These are the tales of the unseen (distant past) which We reveal to you. You were not among them, as they cast (lots with) their pens (to determine) who would (be the legal guardian and) assume the care of Mary. You were not among them when they (disagreed and) quarreled
3|45|And (remember) when the angels said, "Oh Mary, Allah gives you the good news of ´the word´ from Him. His name shall be Messiah, Jesus son of Mary, held in high honor in this world and the hereafter; and he will be one of those nearest (to Allah)
3|46|From the cradle, he shall speak to mankind, and (also later) as an adult. He will be the righteous one
3|47|She said, "Oh my Lord, how can I have a child? No man has ever touched me!" (Allah) said, "Precisely so! Allah creates what He wants. When He decrees anything, He (simply) says to it ´Be!´ and it becomes
3|48|And He (Allah) will teach him (Jesus) the book and the wisdom, and the Torah and the gospels
3|49|As a messenger to the children of Israel (he will say), "I have brought you the proof from your Lord. Out of clay, I fashion the figure of a bird and by Allah´s leave, it turns into a (real) bird when I blow into it. By Allah´s leave, I cure those who are blind by birth, and the lepers. I bring the dead (back) to life by Allah´s leave. I inform you of that which you eat, and of that which you store up in your homes. Surely, in that is a definite proof for you, if you are the believers
3|50|(I have come) to confirm the Torah that has existed before me, and to make lawful for you some of what was forbidden to you. I have brought you the proof from your Lord. So fear Allah, and follow me
3|51|Truly! Allah is my Lord, and your Lord! Therefore, worship Him (alone); that is the straight path
3|52|When Jesus sensed (disbelief and) denial on the part of the children of Israel, he asked, "Who will be my supporter in the cause of Allah?" The disciples responded (promptly), "We are the helpers of Allah! We believe in Allah. Bear witness, that we are really the obedient ones _ (the muslims)
3|53|Our Lord, we believe in that which You have revealed, and we follow the messenger. So enroll us among those who bear witness (to the truth)
3|54|They _ (the unbelievers, the children of Israel) _ hatched a scheme (to kill Jesus), and Allah put His (own) plan into action. Allah is absolutely the very Best of the planners
3|55|(Remember) when Allah said, "Oh Jesus, I am certainly going to recall (and receive) you, and raise you towards Myself. I will rid you of (the filthy environment and) those who disbelieve (in you). Until the Day of Judgment, I will place those who follow you over and above those who disbelieve (in you). Eventually, towards Me you will all return. Then, I will decide and settle all matters of dispute between you
3|56|In the life of this world as well as the life to come, I will inflict a severe torment upon those who disbelieve. They will have no helper
3|57|And He will award the due rewards to, and compensate to the full extent, (all) those who believe (in Him) and do the righteous acts. And Allah does not like the evildoers
3|58|What We recite to you is the revelation (from Allah) and the wisdom filled reminder
3|59|Indeed, according to Allah, the matter of (the birth of) Jesus is similar to the example of (the creation of) Adam; He created Adam from dust and said, "Be!" Thus, he became
3|60|(This is) the truth (that comes) from your Lord. So, do not be a skeptics
3|61|Definite knowledge has come to you (about Jesus). Despite that, if anyone (disputes the facts and) argues with you, say, "Come! Let us call (and assemble) our sons and your sons, our women and your women, and ourselves and yourselves. Then, let us invoke (the wrath of) Allah, and pray and plead for the curse of Allah to befall the liars
3|62|(Concerning Jesus), this certainly is the true account. There is no god, except Allah; and Allah is definitely the most Powerful, and the Wisest
3|63|If they turn away (beware)! Allah is well Aware of the mischief mongers
3|64|Say, "Oh people of the scriptures! Come, let us rally around the belief that is common between us: that we will worship no one except Allah, that we will not associate anything with Him, and that neither of us will take, instead of Allah, others like ourselves as our Lord." If they turn away, then say, "You bear witness that it is we who are the obedient ones _ (the muslims)
3|65|Oh people of the scriptures! Why do you debate (and differ) about (the sect) Ibraheem (belonged to)? Neither the Torah, nor the Gospels were revealed till (long) after his time. Do you then, have no sense
3|66|Here you are (again)! You have already differed (and bickered) concerning matters about which you had some knowledge. Why must you wrangle concerning matters about which you have no knowledge? Allah knows (all), while you know nothing (at all)
3|67|Ibraheem was neither a Jew nor a Christian. In fact, he was an obedient and sincere devotee of Allah; he was not among the idolaters
3|68|The people who can rightfully claim (allegiance to) Ibraheem, are of course those who obeyed him; and (now) this prophet (Muhammad, SAW) and those who believe (in this prophet). And Allah is the Protector of the believers
3|69|A group of the people of the scriptures would love to lead you (all) astray. But, they only lead themselves astray, and no one else. They (just) do not realize
3|70|Oh people of the book! Why do you reject the revelations (and signs) of Allah, though you bear witness (to the truth) yourself
3|71|Oh people of the book! Why do you drape the truth with falsehood? (Why do) you knowingly conceal the truth
3|72|A faction of the people of the book said (to each other), "At the start of the day, express belief in what has been revealed to the believers, but renounce it in the evening. Perhaps, (by such means) they would (repudiate and) turn back (from their beliefs)
3|73|(They say), "Do not believe anyone unless he follows (the tenets of) your (own) sect." (To that), say, "The true guidance, in fact, is the guidance of Allah!" (They also say), "Do not believe that another (prophet) is granted the same (revelation) as was (once) given to you. Otherwise, they will argue with you before your Lord." Say, "Indeed, the bounties (of all sorts) are in the hands of Allah. He grants (whatever He wants to) whomever He wants. Allah (and His mercy) is Boundless; He is the all-Knowing
3|74|He selects (and singles out) for His mercy, whomever He wants. Allah is the Lord of great honor
3|75|Among the people of the scriptures are some who would readily return (your trust) to you, even if you entrust them with a lot of money. Among them are also those who would not pay you back, even if you entrusted him with a single ´dinar´, unless you stand over them (and demand it) constantly. This is so, because they say, "There is no liability upon us about matters concerning the illiterate _ (the non-jews)." They deliberately utter lies about Allah
3|76|On the contrary! Whoever fulfills his pledge, and fears (Allah, will find) that Allah of course loves those who adopt piety
3|77|Of course, those who trade away the covenant of Allah and their own pledges for the paltry price (in this world), shall have no share in the life-to-come. On the day of Resurrection, Allah will not talk to them, nor (will He even) look at them; and He will not cleanse them (of their sins). For them, there exists a painful punishment
3|78|Some of them twist their tongues and distort (the text as they quote) the scriptures. You would think it was part of the scriptures, although it is not in the scriptures (at all). They claim that it is from Allah, when (in fact) it is not (the revelation) from Allah. Knowingly, they utter lies about Allah
3|79|It is not (conceivable) that a man, upon whom Allah confers the book, the wisdom, and the prophethood, would later say to people, "Be my devotees (and worship me) instead of Allah!" Rather (he would say), "Be the faithful servants of Allah, since you teach the scriptures and study them
3|80|He could never ask you to take the angels and (other) prophets as your Lords. Could he order you to deny the truth, even though you had already surrendered (to Allah)
3|81|When Allah made a covenant with the prophets, He said, "I have certainly given you the book and the wisdom. Later, a messenger will come to you confirming (the truth) that you already possess. You must believe him, and you must help him." (Allah) said (to the prophets, and their followers), "Do you agree (to do that), and will you accept (this condition of) My covenant?" They said, "We agree." (Allah) said, "Be witness (to that, and bear that in mind). I am (also there) with you as a witness
3|82|So those who turned away after that are really the (rebellious and) disobedient miscreants
3|83|Do they seek (a way of life) other than the religion of Allah although, willing or not, everyone (and everything) in the heavens and on earth submits to Him? Towards Him, they shall all be made to return
3|84|Say, "We believe in Allah and in that which was revealed to us, as well as that which was revealed to Ibraheem, Ismail, Ishaque, and Yaqub and the tribes. (We believe in) that which was conferred by their Lord upon Musa, Jesus and the (other) prophets. We do not make any distinction among them. We have submitted to Him
3|85|If anyone desires (or adopts a way of life) other than Islam, it will never be accepted. In the life-to-come, he will be among the losers
3|86|How would Allah guide the people who deny (the truth) after having professed belief at first, after they testified that the messenger is true, and after clear proof had come to them? Allah does not guide the nation of evil doers
3|87|The befitting recompense for such people is that the curse of Allah, as well as the curse of His messenger and all mankind, should be upon them
3|88|They shall live in that state forever. Never will their suffering ease, nor shall they ever have a (moment of) a respite
3|89|Except those who (regret and) repent afterwards, and mend their ways. (If they do) then indeed, Allah is the most Forgiving, and the most Merciful
3|90|Of course, the repentance will never be accepted from those who, having believed (at first), disbelieve, and then increase (and grow stubborn) in denial. Such ones have (truly) gone astray
3|91|Indeed, not even an earth-full of gold, if offered as ransom, would be accepted from those who disbelieve and die as disbelievers. For such ones, there exists a painful punishment. They shall not have any helpers
3|92|You will never attain piety (and virtue), until you spend that (in the cause of Allah), which you love (and hold so dear). Allah has full knowledge of whatever you spend (in His cause)
3|93|Every (kind of wholesome) food was (deemed) lawful for the children of Israel, but Israel, (prophet Jacob), forbade himself (certain food on his own) before the Torah was revealed. (Oh Muhammad, SAW), say (to the Jews), "Bring out the Torah, and recite it to us, if you have been truthful
3|94|Those who invent lies about Allah after that would indeed be the evildoers
3|95|Say, "Allah speaks the truth! So, (forsaking all others), follow the creed of Ibraheem as a (fervent) devotee. He was not an idolater
3|96|Of course, the very first house (of worship) built for mankind is certainly the one in Makkah. (It is) full of blessings and guidance for the entire world
3|97|In that (House) are many clear signs _ (for example) the place where Ibraheem stood (and prayed). Whoever enters it obtains (inner) peace (and security). Mankind owes it to Allah to perform the pilgrimage of the House __ anyone who can (afford and) find the means to do so. But if anyone refuses (to perform the pilgrimage), then of course, Allah (is Self-sufficient and) stands in no need of (anyone in) the universe
3|98|Say, "Oh people of the Book, why do you deny the signs of Allah? Allah is the witness to every thing you do
3|99|Say, "Oh people of the book, why do you drive away those who believe from the path of Allah? Why do you seek to make the path seem crooked, even though you are the witness (that it is the straight path)
3|100|Oh you, who believe! If you (heed and) obey (any of) the groups that received the scriptures (earlier), they will make you the disbelievers even after you have believed
3|101|How can you disbelieve (now)? You are the ones to whom the verses of Allah are being recited, and among you is the messenger of Allah. Whoever holds on firmly to Allah is, of course, guided along the straight path
3|102|Oh you who believe! Fear Allah as He rightfully deserves to be feared. And beware! Do not die except as obedient servants _ (as muslims)
3|103|Cling firmly to the rope of Allah, all of you together (as a single entity)! Do not fall into disunity. Remember the favors of Allah upon you, when you were each other´s enemy? He brought your hearts together; and so by His grace you became (like) brothers. You were (perched precariously) at the brink of a fire filled abyss. But He saved you from it. Thus Allah makes the revelations clear to you. Perhaps you will find the right path
3|104|There must (always) be a group among you calling others towards excellence (in character and conduct) _ enjoining (and encouraging) virtue, and forbidding the wrong (and the indecent). Such are the successful ones
3|105|Do not be like those who splintered (into sects) and differed (among themselves), even though clear proofs had already come to them. It is they, for whom there exists the severest (most awful) punishment
3|106|That day, some faces would be bright (and radiant with joy), and some faces would be darkened (and grim with grief). Those with darkened faces (will be told), "Aren´t you those who rejected (the truth) after having believed (at first)? Now taste the torment! (It is) the result of your rejection
3|107|While those with bright faces would abide in the mercy of Allah forever
3|108|We recite to you these revelations of Allah with the (absolute) truth. Allah does not want to be unjust to (anyone in) the universe
3|109|To Allah belongs everything in the heavens, and on earth. All matters are referred to Allah for decisions
3|110|You are indeed the best of people ever brought forth for mankind. You enjoin (virtue and) the right (conduct), and you forbid the wrong (and the indecent). Had the people of the book believed, it would have been for their own good. Some among them are the believers, but most of them are evildoers
3|111|Except for a petty (and passing) distress, they will never (be able to) harm you (substantially). If they fight against you, they will turn their backs to you (and flee). They will receive no help
3|112|Disgrace is decreed for them, wherever they may be! Except in the name of Allah, or for the sake of humanity (they may find some relief). They invoked the wrath of Allah, so wretchedness is written as their destiny. This is because they rejected the revelations of Allah and killed the prophets without a just cause, and because they were rebellious and strayed (far) beyond the bounds
3|113|All of them are not alike. Some of the groups among the people of the book have stayed upright (and on the right path). They recite the verses of Allah in the small hours of the night and fall prostrate (before Him)
3|114|They believe in Allah and the Last Day. They enjoin (virtue and) the right (conduct), and forbid the wrong (and the indecent). They rush towards excellent deeds _ (the virtuous and charitable deeds). They are the righteous ones
3|115|Any good deed they perform will not go unrecognized (or unrewarded). Allah is very well aware of the pious ones
3|116|As for those who continue to reject (the truth), their riches and their offspring would not help them a bit against Allah. They are the inmates of fire, and shall remain there forever
3|117|What they spend during the life of this world may be likened to the frosty frigid wind, that blows across and ravages the (ripe) harvest of the people who have sinned against themselves. Allah is not unjust to them, but in fact, they are cruel to their own souls
3|118|Oh you who believe! Do not take as your intimate friends, anyone other than your own _ (the believers). The others _ (the unbelievers) _ spare no effort to corrupt you. They love to see you in trouble. (Malice and) hatred has already burst forth from their lips, but what their hearts hold back is far worse. We have explained the verses to you. If you would only understand
3|119|Here you are! You have love (and fondness) for them, but they do not love you at all, (even though) you believe in all the scriptures. When they see you, they say, "We believe!" But when they are alone, they bite off their fingertips in their rage towards you. Say, "Die (and fade away) in your fury! Allah is well Aware of that which is in your heart
3|120|They grieve when something good comes your way, and they rejoice when ill luck strikes you. So, provided you persevere patiently, their (two-faced) chicanery (and deceit) will not harm you a bit. Indeed, Allah holds in His sway everything they do
3|121|(Remember) when you left your home at day break, in order to post the believers to their base in the battlefield! Allah is the all-Hearing and the all-Knowing
3|122|(And remember) when the two groups among you lost heart (and almost fell out), even though Allah was their Friend and Protector? In Allah (alone), should the believers place their trust
3|123|Allah had surely helped you at (the battle of) ´Badar´, though you were (utterly) weak (and fewer in number). Therefore, fear (Allah, and be conscious of Him) so that you may be grateful
3|124|(Remember) when you said to the believers, "Will it not be enough for you (to know) that your Lord will (bolster and) help you with three thousand angels sent down (to assist you)
3|125|Indeed, provided you endure with patience and piety, your Lord will assist you with (not three, but) five thousand ranked angels, even if the enemy launches a sudden surprise assault
3|126|Allah gives you this good news so that your hearts would (rejoice and) be reassured by it. Help does not arrive, except by the will of Allah, the Almighty and the Wise
3|127|(He will grant you victory) in order to sever a (significant) section (and strength) of the unbelievers, and to crush them so they may retreat in frustration
3|128|It isn´t your concern at all (Oh Muhammad, SAW) whether He (relents and) turns to them (in forgiveness), or inflicts a (severe) punishment upon them. They certainly are the wrong doers
3|129|To Allah, belong all that is in the heavens, and all that is on the earth. He forgives whom He wills, and He punishes whom He wills. Allah is the oft-Forgiving and the most Merciful
3|130|Oh you who believe! Do not (deal in, or) devour usury, doubling and redoubling (the principal amount). Fear Allah, so you may prosper
3|131|And fear the fire that is prepared for the unbelievers
3|132|And obey Allah and the messenger. Perhaps you may receive mercy
3|133|Hurry towards forgiveness from your Lord, and the paradise which is as vast as the heavens and the earth. It is prepared for the pious
3|134|(Paradise is for) those who spend (for the sake of Allah) in good times and bad. Those who repress their rage, and forgive their fellow men; Allah loves the righteous
3|135|Those who, if they ever (falter and fail, and) err into a base and indecent act, _ and thus wrong their own souls _ remember Allah (soon afterwards) and entreat Allah for forgiveness of their sins. Who else, except Allah can forgive sins? They do not knowingly persist in (and rationalize, or insist upon) the wrong they had perpetrated
3|136|The reward for such ones is forgiveness from their Lord, and the paradise through which run the rivers. There, they shall live forever. How excellent are the rewards for those who do good deeds
3|137|Many civilizations have gone by prior to your time. So, travel about in the land and observe how (severe) were the consequences for those who disbelieved
3|138|This (Qur´an) is a (plain and poignant) statement _ the guidance and the admonition for those who fear (Allah)
3|139|Do not weaken and do not grieve. You will come up on top, if you are the believers
3|140|If you have sustained a wound, _ (a blow in the battlefield) _ others too have suffered a similar kind of wound, earlier. These are the vicissitudes of life that We circulate among mankind by turns. Thus, Allah tests the true believers among you, so He may pick the martyrs among you. Allah does not like the wrongdoers
3|141|In order that Allah may scrutinize (and vindicate) the believers, and crush (and purge) the unbelievers
3|142|Do you suppose you would gain admission into paradise, although Allah has yet to test you? Who among you strives (for His cause), and who endures and perseveres
3|143|You had certainly wished to die (for His cause) before you (actually) came face-to-face with death (on the battlefield). Now you have seen it up close with your own eyes
3|144|Muhammad, (SAW) is no more than a messenger. (Many other) messengers have gone by before him. If he dies, or is slain, will you retreat and turn around on your heels? Anyone who turns back on his heels, would never hurt Allah a bit. Soon, Allah will reward the grateful ones
3|145|No soul can die except by Allah´s leave, and at a preordained time. We will bestow (the benefits) here (in this world) upon anyone who wants (the results and) rewards (of his effort) in this world. We will bestow (the benefits and the rewards) there (in the hereafter) upon anyone who desires the reward in the life after death. Soon, We will reward the grateful ones
3|146|Many prophets fought (for the sake of Allah), and many devoted religious men (fought by their side) too. They did not lose heart because of the suffering they endured in the path of Allah. They did not weaken, and they did not (give up and) demean themselves. Allah loves those who persevere
3|147|All they ever said, and prayed for is this: "Our Lord, forgive our sins, and the excesses we have committed in our affairs. (Lord)! Make our foothold secure (and strong), and grant us victory over the nation of unbelievers
3|148|So Allah granted them the rewards (and benefits) in this world, as well as the very best of the bounties in the life after death. Allah loves those who do the righteous deeds
3|149|Oh you who believe! If you obey the unbelievers, they will turn you back on your heels; you would then end up being the losers
3|150|The fact is, Allah (alone) is your Patron and Protector. He is the very Best of the allies
3|151|(Soon), We will cast panic (and dismay) in the hearts of the unbelievers. (This is) because they associate partners with Allah, for which He has sent down no authority! Fire shall be their lodging! Evil is the abode of the evil doers
3|152|Allah had certainly made good on His promise to you. (Initially), it was you who routed them by His will, until you lost heart and began to dispute (and defy) the order (of the messenger). You violated (the order) as soon as He displayed to you that which you (longed for and) loved _ (the spoils of war). Among you are some who, covet (the benefits and pleasures of) this world, and among you are others who desire the (benefits of the) afterlife. Thus, in order to put you through a test, He diverted you from your foe. He has, in fact (already) forgiven you. Allah is most Gracious to the believers
3|153|As you (fled and) ran (up the hill) in panic without even looking back at any one, the messenger stood there behind you calling you back. Then, He let you undergo one setback after another, so you would not grieve over what eluded you, nor over the adversity that afflicted you. Allah is well Aware of all you do
3|154|Then, after the distress, He sent down a sense of security over you. A (serene) slumber overcame a group among you. Another group that cared only about itself (fretted and) entertained wrongful notions about Allah. Notions (that were born) of ignorance! They said, "Have we the (right of) decision in any matter?" Say (to them), "The (right of) decision in all matters rests with Allah (exclusively)." They do not declare to you what they conceal in their hearts. They (actually) said (in their heart), "If we had a say in the matter, we would not have been killed here." Say, "Even if you had stayed home, those who were destined to be killed would have emerged on their own, and gone forth to that (exact) spot where they were to die." So that, Allah may put to test (and expose) that which is (buried) in your chest. So that, He may scrutinize (and purify) that, which is in your heart. Allah is well Aware of what exists in your chest
3|155|Indeed, those who turned away (from their duty) on the day the two armies met each other did so because, as a result of the deeds they had committed, Shaitan caused them to slip and stumble,. But now Allah has pardoned them. Allah is oft Forgiving, the most Forbearing
3|156|Oh you who believe! Do not be like the unbelievers. About their brothers who travel in the land or go into battle, they say, "Had they been with us they would not have died. They would not have been killed. " Allah has let such notions be the source of (sorrow and) a bewailing (mournful) lament in their hearts. It is Allah Who gives life and death! And Allah watches everything you do
3|157|Surely, if you are slain in the path of Allah, or (happen to) die, then the forgiveness of Allah and (His) mercy (shall be yours) _ far better than the worldly wealth you amass
3|158|Whether you die (at home) or are slain (in the path of Allah), you would certainly be gathered (and presented) before Allah
3|159|It is because of the mercy of Allah that you, (Oh Muhammad, SAW), are lenient (and polite) with them. For, had you been callous and hard of heart, they would have (disbanded and) dispersed from around you. So, pardon them, seek forgiveness for them and seek their advice in matters (that concern them). Then, once you arrive at a decision, put your trust in Allah. Indeed, Allah loves those who place their trust (in Him)
3|160|No one can overcome you, if Allah helps you. And if He forsakes you, is there anyone who can help you after that? So, let the believers put their trust in Allah
3|161|It is not (possible) for a Prophet to deceive (anyone) ever. Whoever cheats and defrauds (others) will, on the Day of Judgment, bring (and carry the burden of) his deceit with him. Each one will then be paid in full for everything he had earned. No one will be wronged at all
3|162|Could the one who seeks the approval (and acceptance) of Allah, ever be like the one who (deserves and) draws the wrath of Allah? Hell shall be his abode, and it is the (most) despicable destination
3|163|They have different status in the sight of Allah! And Allah (vigilantly) watches over everything they do
3|164|By raising a messenger in their midst, and from among them, Allah has certainly conferred a favor upon them. The messenger recites to them His revelations, purifies them, and teaches them the scriptures and the wisdom. Prior to that, they were clearly misguided and lost
3|165|Then, when a disaster struck _ though you had earlier inflicted (upon your enemies) a disaster of twice that magnitude _ you said, "Where is this from?" Say, "It came from yourself, because of your own (sins)." Allah has power over everything
3|166|The adversity you suffered on the day the two armies met was by Allah´s leave, so He may test the believers
3|167|And so He may test the hypocrites! They were told, "Come, fight in the path of Allah, or (at least) defend (yourself against the enemy)." But they responded, "We would have followed you, if we had known (for sure) that there would be a battle." That day, they were nearer apostasy than belief. By their lips, they were declaring that which (just) wasn´t there in their hearts. Allah is well Aware of what they conceal
3|168|They sat (idly) at home and said about their brethren (who fought in the path of Allah), "Had they listened to us, they would not have been killed." Say (to them), "Then (when your time comes) avert death off yourself, if you are truthful
3|169|Do not ever think that, those slain in the path of Allah are dead. In fact, they are living! (Ranked high) with their Lord, they receive their sustenance
3|170|They are very happy with what Allah has bestowed upon them by His grace. They (also) rejoice for those who remain behind, and have yet to join them. They shall have no fear; nor shall they ever grieve
3|171|They rejoice (and bask) in the blessings and the bounties bestowed upon them by Allah. Certainly, Allah does not waste the reward of the pious
3|172|There is a gracious reward for those of them who perform the righteous deeds, fear (Allah), and respond to (the call of) Allah and the messenger, even though they had sustained (reverses) _ the (physical or emotional) wounds
3|173|Others said to them, "(A lot of) people have really come together against you. So beware of them! "But (instead) that caused them to surge in belief, and they exclaimed, "For us, Allah suffices. He is absolutely the very Best of the trustees
3|174|And they came back (home) with the blessings and bounties of Allah. No harm came to them! They (coveted and) sought the approval (and acceptance) of Allah; and Allah is the Lord of infinite bounty
3|175|The fact is, it is Shaitan who instills (into you) the dread of his (disciples and) allies. But don´t be afraid of them! Rather, if you are the believers, fear Me
3|176|Do not be saddened by those who rush (willingly) into disbelief. Indeed, they will not hurt Allah in any way. Allah has willed that He will not assign any share for them in the life-to-come. For them there exists a terrible (most awful) torment
3|177|In fact, those who purchase disbelief, at the expense of belief, would never hurt Allah at all. There is a painful punishment for them
3|178|The unbelievers should not consider it good for them (in anyway), that We have granted them some respite. In fact, We have withheld (Judgment) in their case, so they may (amass and) add to their sins. For them, there exists a humiliating (most disgraceful) punishment
3|179|Allah is not going to leave the believers in the (same) state they are in. He will (sift, sieve and) set apart the wicked from the virtuous. Allah will not disclose the unseen (mysteries of the universe) to them (individually). For that, Allah selects messengers from among them, whomever He wants. So, believe in Allah and His messenger. You shall have a gracious reward, if you believe (in Allah) and fear (Him)
3|180|There are those who stingily cling to what Allah bestows upon them by His grace. (They don´t give charity). Let them not think that it is good for them. In fact, it is woeful (and perilous) for them. On the Day of Judgment, they would be strapped and shackled (around the neck) by that which they (now) hoard (so eagerly). The heritage of the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah; and Allah is well Aware of everything you do
3|181|Allah certainly heard the taunting remarks of those who said, "Allah is poor, while we are rich." We will record their remarks, and also the fact that they have killed the prophets without a just cause. We will say (to them), "Here! Taste the torment of the blazing fire
3|182|This is (precisely) what your own hands have caused. Allah is certainly not unjust to His servants
3|183|(There are) those who said, "In fact, Allah has bound us by a pledge, that we shall not accept (anyone as) a messenger, unless (he performs the miracle of sacrifice, whereby) his offering is devoured by the (divine) fire (from the sky)." Say (to them), "Messengers had come to you before me with very clear signs including the one you have mentioned. Why then, did you kill them, if you are truthful
3|184|(Oh Muhammad, SAW), if they reject you, (remember that) many messengers prior to you had been rejected, including those who brought very clear proofs, the scriptures, and the illuminating book
3|185|Every soul shall have to taste death! The day of Resurrection is when you (can and) shall receive your dues to the fullest extent _ (the consequence of your deeds). (That day), whoever is pulled away from hell, and is ushered into the paradise, will really have triumphed. The life of this world is (nothing but) an illusive enjoyment _ a (mere) deception
3|186|You will most certainly be tested by means of your possessions and your own person. You would definitely hear (many) hurtful remarks, (insults, and affronts) not only from those who were given the scriptures before you, but also from those who associate others with Allah. (Despite that), if you persevere patiently, and be pious, then that is indeed an act of courage and fortitude
3|187|And when Allah accepted a pledge from those who were given the scriptures, (He said), "You must definitely (expound the book and) let it be known fully to mankind; you must not hide it." But they tossed this (instruction) behind their backs. They traded it away for a paltry price. Evil is what they bargained
3|188|Do not think that, those who exult in what they were given, and love to be praised for what they haven´t done (are safe). Do not think that they are exempt from the torment. There exists a painful punishment for them
3|189|To Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. Allah has power over all things
3|190|Of course, the creation of the heavens and the earth, as well as the (contrast and) alternation between the night and the day offer (many) signs for those with intellect
3|191|Those who remember Allah (at all times) _ standing up, sitting down, and lying on their side, and those who ponder over the creation of the heaven and the earth (conclude), "Our Lord, You did not create (all) this in vain (and to no avail). Exalted are You! Shield us from the fire (of hell)
3|192|Our Lord, You would certainly humiliate those whom You commit to the fire. Never will the wrong doers find any help
3|193|Our lord! We certainly heard a caller (Muhammad, SAW) inviting (all) towards faith (saying) ´Believe in your Lord´, and so we believed. Our Lord, forgive our sins, rid us of our bad deeds, and after death, let us be among the devoted and the dutiful
3|194|Our Lord, grant us that which You have promised us through Your messengers. Do not let us suffer humiliation on the day of resurrection. Of course, You never go back on Your promise
3|195|And their Lord responded to their prayers, "I never waste the efforts of any doer (of good deeds) among you _ whether a man or a woman. You are descendants of each other. I will surely cleanse the offenses committed by those who emigrated and were driven out of their homes _ those who were (harassed and) persecuted in My cause; (those who) fought and were slain (for My sake). I will definitely admit them into the gardens (of paradise) through which run the rivers. (That is) the reward from Allah; and Allah has the most excellent rewards
3|196|Do not ever let the (pomp and) prosperity of the unbelievers in the land fool you (or cause you to envy them)
3|197|(This is but) a brief enjoyment! After that, their abode is hell; it is, of course, the worst resting place
3|198|Whereas, there exist gardens of paradise _ through which run the rivers _ for those who fear their Lord. (A generous gift of welcome) _ a hospitable reception from Allah! That which exists with Allah for the devoted and the dutiful, is much better
3|199|There are certainly some among the people of the book who believe in Allah, and in that which is revealed to you, as well as that which was revealed to them (earlier). Humbly, they submit to Allah; they do not trade away the revelations of Allah for a paltry price. Such ones shall receive their reward from their Lord. Indeed, Allah is prompt in settling scores
3|200|Oh you who believe! Persevere patiently, bear (hardship) steadfastly, be ready (for the right deed) and fear Allah! Perhaps you will prosper
4|1|Oh you people! Fear your Lord who created you (all) from a single soul. (From that single soul), He created its mate, and then out of the two, He propagated (and dispersed) multitudes of men and women. Fear Allah, in whose name you seek and demand your rights. Do not sever the ties of kinship. Of course, Allah watches over you closely
4|2|Give the orphans their assets and inheritance (when they reach the marriageable age). Do not substitute your (faulty and) valueless goods with their valuable wares. Do not gobble up their assets into your own. That indeed is a grave sin
4|3|If you are afraid that you might be unfair to the orphan girls (in your charge), then marry (other) women you like _ two, or three, or up to four of them. However, if you fear that you cannot maintain equality and justice (among your wives) then have (only) one wife, and whatever your right hand owns _ (the captive women). That way you are more likely to avoid injustice
4|4|And willingly pay the women (you marry) their ´mehar´ _ (the nuptial dues). However, if they, on their own, remit a portion of it back to you, then you may enjoy it with cheer and joy
4|5|Do not entrust the (immature and the) weak of mind with the wealth and assets over which Allah has appointed you the guardian. But out of that wealth, feed and clothe them (appropriately) and talk to them in a kind and polite manner
4|6|Keep testing the orphans till they reach the marriageable age. If you perceive them to be of sound judgment, then turn their assets over to them. Do not squander and waste the wealth in haste, lest they grow up (and demand their inheritance). The rich guardian should not charge (for managing the assets of the orphan). The poor guardian may have for himself a (reasonable and) customary share. When you turn their assets over to the orphans, arrange to have others witness (the transfer). Though, Allah is enough to take account
4|7|Men have a share in what parents and close relatives leave behind. (So also), women have a share in what parents and close relatives leave behind. A share is ordained (by Allah), whether the estate is small or large
4|8|If the relatives, the orphans and the needy are present at the time of apportioning (of the heritage), give them something from the heritage and say kind and polite words to them
4|9|The executors (of the estate) should realize that if they were leaving frail young children behind (in this world) they would have grave concerns about them. So, they should fear Allah and say polite and proper words to the orphans
4|10|Those who unjustly (and sinfully) misappropriate the wealth of the orphans, are actually packing their bellies with fire. They shall burn in the blazing fire (of hell)
4|11|Allah gives you instructions concerning (the inheritance of) your children. The male has a share equal to the shares of two females. If there are two or more daughters (and no sons), then they shall equally share two-thirds of what is left behind. Should there be only one daughter, she would inherit half. If the deceased left children, each (living) parent of the deceased shall receive one sixth of the inheritance. If the deceased left no children, and the parents are the only heirs, then the mother gets a third; and if (the parents are not the only heirs and) the deceased has brothers, then the mother inherits a sixth. (The proceeds in every case are) after paying off any legacy bequeathed, and debt incurred. You do not know which of the two deserves to benefit more from you _ your parents, or your children. (These fixed shares are) ordained by Allah! Of course, Allah is the all-Knowing, and the Wisest
4|12|Your share is half of what your wives leave behind, provided they have no child. If they have children, then your share is a quarter of what they leave behind, after paying off any legacy bequeathed, and debt incurred. Your widows´ share is a quarter of what you leave behind, provided you have no children. But if you have children, then their share is an eighth of what you leave behind, after paying off any legacy bequeathed, and debt incurred. If the deceased _ man or woman _ is not survived by any children or parent, but has a brother and a sister, then each of them would inherit a sixth. Should there be more than two (siblings), then they shall share equally in a third, after paying any legacy bequeathed, and debts incurred. (Let there be) no harm (to the heirs). These are instructions from Allah! And Allah is all-Aware, and the most Forbearing
4|13|These are the limits prescribed by Allah. Those who obey Allah, and His messenger, will indeed be ushered by Him into paradise _ with rivers running right through _ to live there forever. And that is the greatest achievement
4|14|Those who disobey Allah and His messenger, and stray beyond His limits, are the ones whom He will hurl into the hellfire. They will stay there forever. There is a humiliating punishment for them
4|15|Obtain the testimony of four eye witnesses among you against any of your women accused of committing a salacious deed _ (an extra marital sexual act). If they testify (and confirm her guilt) then confine her to her home till death claims her, or until Allah ordains an alternate way
4|16|Punish those of you _ both, man and woman _ who commit (such a deed). If they (relent and) repent and mend their ways, then leave them alone. Of course, Allah accepts repentance! He is the most Merciful
4|17|In fact, forgiveness is (incumbent) upon Allah for those who commit the sinful act out of ignorance and indiscretion; those who (repent and) seek forgiveness soon after. They are the ones whom Allah will forgive. Allah is the all-Aware, the Wisest
4|18|There is no forgiveness for those who continue to commit (and insist upon) sinful deeds (all their life). Then, as death confronts one of them, he says, "I seek forgiveness now!" (Likewise), there is no forgiveness for those who die as disbelievers. For such ones We have prepared a painful punishment
4|19|Oh you who believe! It is not (proper and) lawful for you to inherit from a woman against her will. Nor (is it proper or lawful) to take back anything you gave her (as a gift) _ unless she commits an openly lewd and salacious act (an extra marital sexual act). Associate with her in an honorable manner. You may dislike her. Yet, it is possible that you may dislike something, though Allah may have placed in it a great deal of good
4|20|In case you want to replace a wife with another, do not take back anything you may have given to her in the past, even if it were a very large sum. Would you take back (your gift) by resorting to slander and a flagrant injustice
4|21|How can you take anything back, after you have already consummated the relationship (and enjoyed each other)? She has secured from you a firm commitment
4|22|Do not wed the women, whom your father (or grandfather) had married. But whatever has already happened (in the past), has happened. That is indeed a lewd deed, an abominable act, a profane practice
4|23|Forbidden for you to marry are: your mothers, your daughters and your sisters, your father´s and your mother´s sisters, your brothers´ and sisters´ daughters, your foster mothers (that is, any women) who (may) have breast fed you, and the foster sisters who have shared the breast milk with you. (Also forbidden are) the mothers of your wives, and the stepdaughters under your care from your wives with whom you have had conjugal relations. But if you did not consummate the marriage (before you divorced her), then there is no sin (for you to marry her daughter). It is forbidden for you to marry the wives of your (biological) sons (that is, those who spring) from your loin. (It is forbidden) for you to gather two sisters in wedlock at the same time. But whatever has happened (in the past), has happened. Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
4|24|(Also forbidden are) women already in wedlock, except those (captive women) your right hand possesses. Allah has decreed that for you! Baring those already mentioned, all other women are lawful for you, provided you seek them with your wealth in honest wedlock, and not for illegal sexual liaison. Pay the women you marry, their ´mehar´ _ (nuptial dowry) _ as a sacred trust. You bear no blame if you pay the ´mehar´ and later agree upon something else (about the dowry) with mutual consent. Indeed Allah is the all-Knowing and the Wisest
4|25|If any one of you lacks the means to wed a free believing woman, he may marry a believing woman among those (captives and slaves) your right hand possesses. Allah is well aware of your (state of) belief; you belong to one another. So, marry them with the permission of their family. Pay the women their ´mehar´ _ (nuptial dowry) _ according to the customary manner. Let the women enter into wedlock, and not have illegal sexual liaisons, nor have secret paramours. After entering into wedlock, if such women commit a salacious act, (adultery), their punishment would be half of the punishment a free woman (committing the same offense) would receive. This (exemption of marrying captive women) is for the one who fears distress (from a lack of self-restraint). However, it is better for you to be patient and restrain yourself. Allah is the most Forgiving, and the most Merciful
4|26|Allah wants to make (matters) clear to you, and to guide you along the ways of those (righteous ones) before you. He accepts your repentance. Allah is all-Knowing, the Wisest
4|27|Allah wants to turn towards you with (His) mercy, while those who have surrendered to their lusts want you to slide down the slippery slope (of sin)
4|28|Allah wants to lighten your burden. Man was created weak (of will)
4|29|Oh you who believe! Do not devour each other´s wealth unfairly _ (through force or fraud). Rather, enter into (a legitimate) trade (and deal fairly) with mutual consent and agreement. Do not kill (destroy) each other. Indeed Allah is full of mercy for you
4|30|We will, soon, hurl into the hellfire anyone who indulges in such aggression and injustice. This is easy for Allah
4|31|If you stay away from the major sins you have been asked to avoid, We will rid you of your minor sins and offenses. We will usher you past the threshold (of paradise) with eminence and honor
4|32|Do not covet the honor and excellence Allah has granted some of you over others. Man shall have the reward for what they earn, while women shall have the reward for what they earn. Entreat Allah for His bounties and blessings. Certainly, Allah has (the infallible) knowledge about all things
4|33|We have assigned the heirs for whatever the parents and close relatives leave behind. But (abide by your promises and) give the share to those your right hand has pledged. Indeed, Allah is the witness to every (pledge and every) thing
4|34|Men are (appointed) in charge (and the caretakers) of women _ (they are held responsible for maintaining the women physically, financially, and emotionally) _ because Allah has given the one precedence over the other. Also, because they spend their means (to support the women). Thus, the virtuous women are obedient. They guard the rights of their husbands in their absence _ (the right) that Allah has upheld. If you perceive defiance (and disloyalty) from your women, admonish them, (then) keep them apart from your bed, and (then, as a last resort) beat them. If they relent and obey, do not seek the means to harass them. Of course, Allah is the most High, the Greatest
4|35|If you fear a breach (of relationship) between the husband and wife, appoint two arbiters _ one from his family and one from hers. If both of them want reconciliation, Allah will cause a consensus between the two. Indeed, Allah is the all-Knowing, and the most Aware
4|36|Serve Allah, and associate no one with Him. Be kind and gracious to your parents; (also be kind) to the kinsfolk, the orphans, the needy, the neighbor who is a kin as well as the one who is not, the fellow traveler, the wayfarer and the slaves (and captives). Of course, Allah does not like the conceited braggarts
4|37|Those who act miserly, and ask others to do the same, hide the bounties Allah has bestowed upon them. For the disbelievers, We have prepared a disgraceful punishment
4|38|And (also) for those who flaunt (and flash), when they spend their wealth, in order to show off to the people. They do not believe in Allah or the Day of Judgment. Whoever has Shaitan as an intimate companion has indeed an evil companion
4|39|What harm could have come to them, if they had believed in Allah and the Last Day, and had spent a little out of the sustenance Allah had granted them? Allah is well-Aware of them
4|40|Indeed, Allah will not wrong anyone _ not even worth the weight of an atom! (In fact) if there is a good deed, He doubles it. (In addition) He will award an immense reward, on His own
4|41|(Just imagine) what will it be like (on the Day of Judgment)! Against each nation, We will call (Our messengers as) a witness. Against these people, (Oh prophet) We will call you as a witness
4|42|That day, those who disbelieved and defied the messenger would wish that the earth was leveled flat over them. They would not be able to hide anything from Allah
4|43|Oh you who believe! Do not come near ´salat´ if you are drunk, until you know what you utter. Nor if you are spiritually unclean (after a sexual contact) _ unless you are traveling _ until you (bathe and) clean yourself. If you are sick or traveling, or if any of you has been to the toilet, or if you have come in (sexual) contact with (your) women and you do not find water (to clean yourself), then perform ´Tayyamum´. Find a clean slab of soil and (after touching it) run your hand over your face and hands. Indeed, Allah is Lenient and Merciful
4|44|Do you not look at those, who were given a portion of the scriptures? They use it to purchase misguidance! They want you to lose the right path, too
4|45|And Allah knows your enemies very well. As your protector, Allah is sufficient! Allah is sufficient as a helper
4|46|(Oh prophet), among the Jews are some, who (when they come to visit you) change words out of context. (They use pun and play upon words. They pretend to say, ´we heard and we obeyed´, and ´wait, we did not hear´. Instead, with a twist of their tongue, they make it sound (as if they said), "We heard and we disobeyed", and "Listen, may you go deaf!" and ´Raina´ _ (an insult in Hebrew). Thus, they slander the (true) faith. It would have been much better for them and more upright, had they said, "We heard and we obey" and "Listen to us, and be patient with us". Because of their disbelief, Allah has cursed them! Little is what they believe
4|47|Oh you who were given the scriptures (earlier)! Believe in the revelation We have sent (to Muhammad, SAW), confirming your earlier scriptures. Believe it, before We (distort and) blot out your faces and make them reel backwards. Or We may lay a curse on them like We cursed the people of the Sabbath-breakers. The command of Allah always comes to pass
4|48|In fact, Allah does not forgive ´shirk´ _ (an act of associating others as equal to Him). Baring that, He may forgive anything He wants, and whomever He pleases. The one who commits ´shirk´ has indeed invented a singularly sinister sin
4|49|Haven´t you seen those, who (boast and) claim sanctity for themselves? It is, in fact, Allah Who (purifies and) sanctifies whomever He wants. They shall not be wronged _ not even worth a fibril on a date-stone
4|50|See how they make up lies about Allah? That, of itself, is a flagrant sin
4|51|Haven´t you seen those who were granted a portion of the scriptures? They believe in superstition and (they rally around) ´Taghut´ _ (entities and institutions aligned against Allah). Concerning the disbelievers, they say, "They are closer to the right path than the believers
4|52|Such are those whom Allah has cursed! You will not find any helper for the one cursed by Allah
4|53|Do they have a share in the kingdom (of Allah)? Had it been so, they would not have granted people even a speck on a date-stone
4|54|Are they envious of mankind, because of what Allah granted them by His grace? We did bestow upon the descendants of Ibraheem the book and the wisdom, and We granted them a mighty empire
4|55|Among the descendants of Ibraheem are some who believe in him. Indeed, the blazing inferno of hell shall suffice for those who reject and turn away
4|56|Of course, We will soon let those who reject Our revelations, burn in the fire of hell. As often as their hide burns (to a char), We will replace it with a new skin for them, so they may taste the torment (all over again). Allah is the Almighty, the all-Wise
4|57|We will soon admit into paradise _ through which run the rivers _ all those who believe and do the righteous deeds. There, they shall live forever. There, they shall have the chaste and immaculate spouses. We will usher them into a lavishly diffuse and dense shade
4|58|Allah has surely ordered that you should restore the trusts (reposed in you) to their rightful owners. (Also that) you should render a fair and equitable judgment, whenever you are asked to judge between people. Allah gives you the most excellent advice. Indeed, Allah hears-all! And He sees-all
4|59|Oh you who believe! Obey Allah, obey the messenger, and (obey) those who occupy a position of authority among you. Then, should there arise a dispute among you concerning anything, refer it to Allah and the messenger _ if you (really) believe in Allah and the Last Day. That is much better and will (prove to) be the best outcome
4|60|(Oh prophet)! Aren´t you aware of those, who claim to believe in what has been revealed to you, as well as that, which had been revealed before you? Yet, they seek the decisions (concerning their lives) from the ´taghut´ _ (those arrogant ones rebelling against Allah) _ even though ´taghut´ is precisely what they were ordered to reject and refute. Shaitan wants to lead them astray, and far away
4|61|When told, "Come to what Allah has revealed, (come) to the messenger", you find that the hypocrites shy away in repulsion
4|62|Why is it that, when disaster strikes because of what their own hands have caused, they come to you swearing? They say, "By Allah, we only wanted to promote good will, and be gracious
4|63|Allah knows fully well whatever exists in their hearts. So bear with them and admonish them with words that will touch their inner selves
4|64|We did not send any messenger, except to be obeyed in accordance with His will. When the hypocrites had caused an outrage against themselves, they should have come to you. If they had sought forgiveness from Allah, and if the messenger had (also) sought forgiveness on their behalf, they would surely have found that Allah is all Forgiving and the most Merciful
4|65|Not at all! By your Lord, they can never really be the believers unless they accept you as a judge concerning all matters of dispute between them. (They cannot be the believers) until they find no conflict in their mind concerning any matter you have settled and put to rest; until they accept all your decisions with complete and total submission
4|66|Barely a few would have complied, had We ordered them to lay down their lives or to leave their homes. They would have fared better, had they done what they were being advised. It would have strengthened their faith
4|67|Then, We would surely have granted them an exquisite reward by Our grace
4|68|And We would certainly have guided them towards the straight path
4|69|Whoever obeys Allah and the messenger shall reside in the company of those whom Allah has blessed _ the prophets, the sincere and the truthful, the martyrs, and the righteous ones. They are such excellent companions
4|70|Such is the honor and bounty that comes from Allah! Sufficient, indeed, is Allah as the all-Knowing (Lord)
4|71|Oh you who believe! (Always) be on your guard! Go forth (on expeditions) in small detachments, or advance together (as a group)
4|72|Among you is the one who loiters behind (and declines to fight for Allah). Then, if misfortune befalls you, he says, "Allah favored me, else I would be there (to face the misfortune) with them
4|73|And if Allah´s bounties come your way, he says _ as though there never existed any love between him and you _ "Alas! If only I had been with them, I would have achieved some splendid success
4|74|Those who have traded away the life of this world for (the benefits of) the life-to-come, ought to fight for the sake of Allah. To anyone who fights for the sake of Allah, We will award the most generous reward whether he is killed (in the process) or comes out victorious
4|75|What is wrong with you? Why would you not fight for the sake of Allah on behalf of the weak and oppressed men, women and children? Those who pray (to Allah), "Our Lord! Rescue us from this town; its residents are cruel. Raise, by Your grace, an ally for us. Grant us by Your will a helper
4|76|Those who believe, do fight for the sake of Allah, while those who reject faith fight for the cause of ´taghut´ _ (all rebellious forces aligned against Allah). So, fight against the minions of Shaitans. Feeble indeed is the wily guile of Shaitan
4|77|Aren´t you aware of those who were told to restrain their hands _ (keep from fighting), to establish ´salat´, and to pay the ´zakat´? (Later) when fighting was enjoined upon them, some of them have begun to fear people like they should fear Allah. In fact, (their fear of people is) even more than (their) fear of Allah. They say, "Our lord! Why did You enjoin fighting upon us? Why did You not give us a respite for a little while longer?" Say, "Brief are the comforts of this life! The life-to-come is better indeed for those who do their duty! You will not be wronged at all _ not even worth a fibril upon a date-stone
4|78|Death will overtake you no matter where you are, even if you were (hiding) in a fortified lofty tower. If something good happens to them, they say, "This is from Allah." But when misfortune strikes, they say, "This is from you." Say, "All of it is from Allah!" What is wrong with these people? They hardly understand anything
4|79|Whatever good happens to you is indeed, from Allah. Whatever ill befalls you, is of course (caused) by your own selves. (Oh Prophet)! We sent you as a messenger for mankind. Allah is enough as a witness
4|80|The one who obeys the messenger has in fact obeyed Allah. We have not sent you as a warden over anyone who turns away
4|81|They say, "We are obedient!" But as they leave your presence, some of them (gather at night and) conspire to do just the opposite of what you said. Allah is recording their nightly cabals. So, let them be, and place your trust in Allah. Sufficient is Allah as a trustee
4|82|Why don´t they ponder over the Qur´an? Had it been from a source other than Allah, they would have found a great deal of conflict (and contradiction) in it
4|83|When they come upon a news that has a bearing upon (public) safety or hazard, they spread it around. (Instead), they should convey it to the messenger, or others in authority among them _ those with ability to draw the correct conclusion from it. If Allah had not bestowed His favors and His mercy upon you, then you would have _ barring a few among you _ done the bidding of Shaitan
4|84|So, fight for the sake of Allah. You are accountable for none but yourself. But urge the believers (to fight). It might just be that (by your hand) Allah will curb (and curtail) the might of the disbelievers. Allah is Mightier and more Powerful! His torture is the most Severe
4|85|Whoever pleads (and intercedes for) a good cause shall get a share (of the reward) from it. Whoever (pleads and) intercedes for an evil cause shall bear the share of the burden (of sin). Allah maintains a strict vigil over everything
4|86|When someone welcomes you with a greeting, respond with an even better salute, or (at least) return the same greeting. Indeed, Allah will take into account every single thing
4|87|(He is) Allah! There is no god but He! He will most certainly gather you on the day of resurrection. There is no doubt about that! Who could be more truthful (and sincere) in his assertion than Allah
4|88|Why are there two opinions among you concerning the hypocrites? Because of the wrong they have wrought, Allah has made them revert (to disbelief). Do you wish to guide the one whom Allah has led astray? You will not find any way out for the one whom Allah misleads
4|89|The hypocrites wish that you would reject faith just like they have. Then, you will (descend down to their level and) be equal to them. Therefore, do not choose them as friends unless they (emigrate and) leave their homes in the path of Allah. If they revert (to open hostility), then seize and slay them wherever you see them. Do not take them as friends or protectors, nor as helpers
4|90|Except for those (hypocrites) who find refuge with a nation with whom you have a treaty! Or unless they come to you such that their hearts cringe and neither allow them to fight you, nor their own people. Had Allah willed, He would have given them power over you, and they would have fought you. Therefore, if they stay aloof and do not fight you, or if they make overtures of peace, then Allah has given you no reason to commit aggression against them
4|91|You will find other hypocrites who seek to stay safe from you, as well as from their people. But, (as soon) as they are tempted with a lure, they plunge headlong into mischief. If they do not stay neutral, and do not make overtures of peace towards you, and do not restrain their hands, then seize and slay them wherever you see them. In their case, We have given you a clear sanction
4|92|It is not (conceivable) for a believer to kill another believer _ unless it was (unintended, accidental or) by mistake. Whoever kills a believer by (accident or) mistake must set free a believing slave (as a penance), and must pay blood money as compensation to the family of the deceased _ unless the family waives (the blood money) out of charity. If the deceased belonged to a nation at war with you and was also a believer, then the penance shall be the freeing of a believing slave, (but no blood money). If the believing deceased belonged to a nation with whom you have a pact of alliance, then the penance involves payment of blood money to the family (of the believing deceased), in addition to the freeing of the believing slave. The one who does not find (the financial means) must observe fasts daily for two consecutive months to seek forgiveness from Allah. Of course, Allah is all-Knowing and the Wisest
4|93|Hellfire is the punishment for anyone who kills a believer intentionally and willfully. He shall stay there forever. He incurs the wrath and the curse of Allah. For such a one, He has prepared the severest (most awful) torment
4|94|Oh you who believe! When you go out (to fight) in the path of Allah, make a distinction (between friends and foes). If someone wishes you the greeting of Islam, do not _ seeking the benefits of this world _ be quick and say, "You are not the believer." Allah has the most abundant booty and benefits for you. In fact, you were like that once, but Allah bestowed His favors upon you. Therefore, (verify and) ascertain the facts first. Indeed, Allah is very well Aware of everything you do
4|95|The two are not equal: those who sit at home (and do not join the fighting) _ unless they have a reason; they are handicapped _ and those who strive hard in the path of Allah with their wealth and lives. Over those who sit at home, Allah has excelled and elevated to a higher honor those who strive hard with their wealth and lives. Compared to those who sit at home, Allah will award a far greater reward to those who wage a struggle
4|96|(He will bestow upon them) a much higher honor by His grace, as well as forgiveness and mercy! Allah is the most Forgiving, and the most Merciful
4|97|There are those who have wrought a wrong upon themselves (by not migrating with the prophet, as ordered). The angels (of death), would take possession of their souls and ask, "What was wrong with you?" They would answer, "We were too weak and oppressed in the land!" The angels will say, "Wasn´t the land of Allah vast and spacious enough, so you could emigrate (and seek refuge) elsewhere?" Such ones would have an abode in hell. What a despicable destination
4|98|Except for the men, women and children who are weak and oppressed! They are unable to muster the means (to migrate), and (therefore) find no way out
4|99|Perhaps, Allah will grant forgiveness to those (weak) ones. Allah is oft-Pardoning, and the most Forgiving
4|100|Whoever leaves his home in the path of Allah, will find many places in the land to dwell, and (many means of) livelihood. The reward definitely falls due on Allah for the one who forsakes his home for the sake of Allah and His messenger, but death overcomes him (during the process). Allah is the most Forgiving, the most Merciful
4|101|You incur no sin, if you shorten ´the salat´ while traveling through the land, for fear of an attack by the unbelievers. Indeed, the unbelievers are your professed enemies
4|102|(Oh prophet! During the battle) if you are among the believers leading ´the salat´ then let (only) one group stand in salat behind you; let them bear their arms while they stand in ´salat´. After they perform the prostration, let them move to the rear (and stand guard). Let the other group that has not yet performed their ´salat´ come forward and stand behind you. (But during all this time) they should be on guard and bear their arms. The unbelievers would love to catch you unawares and neglectful of your weapons and your belongings, so they can launch a surprise attack and route you with a single swoop. You incur no sin, if you put down your weapons, because you experience a distress due to rain or because you are ill. But (always) be on guard. Indeed, Allah has prepared a humiliating punishment for the unbelievers
4|103|After you conclude the ´salat´, remember Allah a lot _ standing up, sitting down or reclining. Then, once you feel secure again, perform the full (uncurtailed) ´salat´. Indeed, performing the ´salat´ at its prescribed time is mandated for the believers
4|104|Do not weaken or slacken in the pursuit of your enemy. (Remember), they too have sustained the same kind of damage and hardship as you have endured. But you expect to receive that from Allah, which they do not expect. Of course, Allah knows all, and is the Wisest
4|105|Indeed, We have revealed to you the book with the (absolute) truth. So that, you may judge among people (in accordance) with what Allah has guided you. Do not act as a pleader and a proponent for the treacherous _ those who betray their trust
4|106|Seek forgiveness from Allah! Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
4|107|Do not plead on behalf of those who betray themselves. Indeed, Allah does not like those who are treacherous and sinful _ (those who breach and betray the trust reposed in them)
4|108|They conceal (their deeds) from mankind, but they cannot (ever) conceal anything from Allah. He is there with them at night, when they plot and utter (blasphemous) words that displease Him. Indeed, Allah surrounds them with (a complete knowledge of) what they do
4|109|Here you are, pleading and arguing on their behalf in the life of this world! But, on the day of Resurrection, who is going to plead before Allah on their behalf? Who will serve as their spokesman and supporter
4|110|The one who commits a sinful act or wrongs himself, and thereafter implores Allah for forgiveness, will find that Allah is the most Forgiving, and the most Merciful
4|111|Whoever commits a sin, actually commits it against himself. For, Allah is the all-Knowing, the Wisest
4|112|Whoever commits a moral offense or a sin, and throws the blame on an innocent person, actually bears (in addition to the sin of lying) the sin of slander _ a flagrant sin
4|113|Actually, the favors of Allah and His blessings are upon you. Otherwise, a group that had intended and attempted to lead you astray (would have prevailed). But they mislead no one except themselves, and they cannot harm you a bit. Allah has revealed to you the Book and the wisdom, and He has taught you that which you did not know. Allah´s favors upon you are enormous
4|114|Most of the secret counsels contain nothing good or wholesome, unless it is for (the purpose of) encouraging charity and righteous deeds, or for affecting peace and reconciliation among people. If someone does that, seeking the pleasure of Allah, then We will soon grant him an enormous reward
4|115|After the guidance has been revealed and explained, if anyone parts his way with the messenger and follows a path different from that of the believers, then We will divert him along his (chosen) path. We will hurl him in the hell (in the hereafter). What a despicable destination
4|116|Indeed, Allah does not (ever) forgive ´shirk´ _ (the sin of associating partners with Him) _ anything else He will forgive for whomever He wills. He, who commits ´shirk´ has in fact lost his way, and has gone far astray
4|117|That which they invoke instead of Him, are (just some) false female idols. In fact, they do not call anyone but Shaitan, the wretched rebel against Allah
4|118|Allah cursed (Shaitan), and (in response) he said, "I will lure away a large number of Your servants (as my followers)
4|119|I will definitely mislead them. I will certainly stir up vain and wanton desires in them. I will command them and they will split the ears of the cattle _ (a common practice of the idol worshippers). I will persuade them, and they will change and corrupt the nature (of the order) of things that Allah has created." Whoever takes Shaitan as his master instead of Allah, has indeed incurred a severe and significant loss
4|120|Shaitan holds out false promises to his followers, and arouses in them the wanton and vain desires. The promise of Shaitan is nothing but chicanery _ a deception
4|121|Hell is the abode for all such people. They will find no way to escape from it
4|122|We will soon usher into the gardens of paradise _ with rivers flowing right through them _ all those who believe and act righteously. They will live there till eternity. The promise of Allah is the (absolute) truth. What could be more credible and incontrovertible than the word of Allah
4|123|The final outcome (in the life-to-come) will not depend upon your (wishful) claims and aspirations, nor upon those of the people of the book. Whoever commits evil shall face the punishment for it, and he will not find any protector or helper besides Allah
4|124|All those who do the righteous deeds _ men as well as women, provided they are the believers _ shall enter paradise. They will not be wronged at all, (nor deprived of their rightful reward) _ not even worth a dint on a date stone
4|125|Can there be any one with a better way of life than the person who submits his will to (the will of) Allah, performs the righteous deeds and follows the creed of Ibraheem, the devotee of Allah exclusively? And Allah did choose Ibraheem as His devoted friend
4|126|To Allah belongs everything in the heavens and on earth. And Allah surrounds (and holds in His sway) every single thing
4|127|They seek your opinion about women. Say, "Allah instructs you about them and (reminds you about) what was recited to you (earlier) in the book concerning the orphan girls. (Out of greed), you desire to marry them but you are not prepared to give them their lawful share and their rights _ (the nuptial dowry and a share in inheritance) _ that have been ordained for them! (He) also (instructs you) about the helpless and oppressed children. You should treat the orphans with justice. Indeed, Allah is very well aware of any (and every) good deed you ever do
4|128|In case a woman fears abuse, mistreatment or desertion by her husband, there is nothing wrong for the two of them to compromise and come to terms. It is better to make peace (and restore harmony). The soul is certainly swayed by greed. If you are righteous and ward off evil, then (be assured that) Allah is very well Aware of everything you do
4|129|Even if you (sincerely) desire (and try), you will not be able to maintain equality among (all) your wives. So do not lean towards one to an extent that you leave others (apprehensive and) in abeyance. If you mend your ways and fear (Allah), then indeed Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
4|130|If the husband and wife (decide to) separate, Allah will provide sustenance to both of them out of His abundance. Allah is the Infinite, the Wisest
4|131|To Allah belongs everything in the heavens and on earth. We had instructed those who received the scriptures before you and (now We instruct) you too, (Oh believers), that you should fear Allah. But if you reject, then (remember that) everything in the heavens and on earth, does indeed belong to Allah! And Allah is Free of all wants and Worthy of all praise
4|132|Yes indeed, everything in the heavens and on earth belongs to Allah, and Allah suffices as an advocate _ (He is worthy of your trust)
4|133|Oh you people, if He wills He can make you extinct and bring others in your place! Allah has the power to do (that and) everything (else)
4|134|Anyone who prefers (to receive) the result and the recompense in the life of this world, (should know that) Allah has the rewards (to bestow) not only in this life, but also in the life-to-come. Of course, Allah hears-all, and observes everything
4|135|Oh you who believe! Be upright, and uphold justice staunchly. (Always) bear testimony for (the sake of) Allah, even if it goes against you, your parents or your near relatives. (Bear true testimony) whether it is (for or against) a rich man or a poor man. (The commands of) Allah has priority over (the concern for) any of them. Do not pursue your passions, lest you lapse into injustice. If you (conceal), distort or (otherwise) fail to mention the truth, then remember, Allah is very well Aware of everything you do
4|136|Oh you who believe! Believe (sincerely) in Allah, His messenger, and the scriptures He has revealed to His messenger (Muhammad, SAW) as well as the scriptures He had revealed previously. Whoever fails to believe in Allah, His angels, His books, His messengers, and the Day of Judgment has indeed strayed and has wandered far away (from the right path)
4|137|Indeed, Allah is never going to forgive those who believe (at first) and then reject (the truth), then claim to believe again only to return to disbelief once again, and thereafter increase in disbelief. He is never ever going to forgive them, or guide them to the right path
4|138|Give such hypocrites the news that a painful punishment awaits them
4|139|There are those who pick the unbelievers ¬_ instead of the believers _ as their friends and protectors. Do they seek power and prestige from (their association with) the unbelievers? In fact, all the power and prestige belongs entirely to Allah
4|140|It has (already) been revealed to you in the Book (the Qur´an) that: you should not sit with a group when you hear the verses of Allah being rejected and ridiculed in that company, until they (change the topic and) engage themselves in a different subject. Otherwise, you will become like them. Indeed, Allah is going to gather the hypocrites and the unbelievers together in the hell
4|141|There are some (hypocrites) who are waiting to see your fate. If victory comes to you from Allah, they will say to you, "Were we not with you?" However, if fate favored the unbelievers, they will say to them, "Could we not have (fought against you and) overwhelmed you? Didn´t we keep the believers from (defeating) you?" Allah will render his judgment between you (and them) on the Day of Judgment. Allah will never allow the unbelievers a way over the believers
4|142|The hypocrites seek to deceive Allah, but it is actually He Who dupes them. They are lethargic (and listless) when they stand for ´salat´ _ (they) only (wish) to be noticed by others (and just go through the motions of ´salat´). Little do they remember Allah
4|143|They waver and fluctuate. They are neither with this group nor with that. You will never find a way (out) for the one whom Allah leads astray
4|144|Oh you who believe! Do not pick the unbelievers instead of the believers, as your friends and allies. Do you want to place before Allah a clear proof of your guilt
4|145|Indeed, the hypocrites shall occupy the lowest level of hell _ (its deepest abyss),. You will not find anyone who would (want to) be their helper
4|146|But those of them who repent, make amends, hold on firmly to Allah, and devote their religion sincerely and exclusively for Allah are going to be with the believers. Soon, Allah will grant the believers an enormous reward
4|147|If you believe and express gratitude, why would Allah want to punish you (for your past sins)? Indeed, Allah is ever so appreciative (of the grateful ones)! And He is the all-Knowing
4|148|Allah does not like anyone _ except the one who is wronged _ to speak ill (of others) in public. Allah hears and knows everything
4|149|Whether you disclose or hide the good (deeds), and pardon (others for) the evil (done to you, know it, that) Allah is the oft-Pardoning, the (infinitely) Capable
4|150|Indeed, those attempting to make a distinction between Allah and the messengers, are actually the ones who reject Allah and the messengers. They say, "We believe in some but we reject the others." They want to strike a course midway between the two _ (the right and the wrong path)
4|151|Such ones are positively the staunch (and stubborn) unbelievers. We have prepared a humiliating punishment for the unbelievers
4|152|Allah will soon grant the rewards to those who believe in Allah and His messengers, and do not make any distinction between them (the messengers). Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
4|153|The people of the book demand that you cause a book to descend from the heavens in their presence. They had made even greater (and more unreasonable) demands from Musa. They said, "Let us see Allah plainly (with our own eyes)." Because of their wickedness, a lightning thunder-bolt struck them down. Later, even after clear proofs had come to them, they took the calf as their god. Yet, We forgave that (transgression). We gave Musa, a manifest mandate
4|154|At that time We made a covenant with them. We caused Mount ´Toor´ to protrude and hang over them. We said to them, "Go through the gate (in humility, bowing down) in prostration." We said to them, "Do not exceed (or side step) the limits of the Sabbath-laws." We took a sacred (inviolable) covenant from them
4|155|(We punished them) because of their breach of the sacred covenant, and their rejection of the signs of Allah; (We punished them because of) the wrongful slaying of the prophets by them, and their (boastful) statements, "Our hearts are (safe and) sheathed (against your sermons)." Rather, because of their disbelief, Allah stamped a seal on their hearts. Little is what they believe
4|156|(We punished them) because of their rejection (of the messenger Jesus), and their atrocious utterances of slander against Mary
4|157|(We punished them because of) their (blatant and boastful) statement, "We killed Jesus, the son of Mary, the Massiah, the messenger of Allah!" But they did not kill him, and they did not crucify him! It just appeared to them to be so! Those who differ are certainly in doubt about that matter. They do not have a definite knowledge. (They have nothing) except their assumptions and conjectures. They definitely did not kill him
4|158|The fact is, Allah raised him (towards Himself) and Allah is the most Powerful, the Wisest
4|159|In (the throes of) death, every single one of the people of the book would certainly (come to know, and would) believe in Jesus. On the Day of Judgment, he (Jesus) will be a witness against them
4|160|Thus, for those who became Jews We forbade _ (as a punishment) for their wickedness _ the wholesome things that We had (earlier) made lawful for them. (This is so) because (so often) they turned away _ (and turned so many away) _ from the path of Allah
4|161|(And, that is so because) they take (and trade in usury and) interest _ (a practice) prohibited for them, and (because) they bilk and cheat people of their possessions under false pretense _ (by fraud and deceit). For the unbelievers among them, We have prepared a painful punishment
4|162|However, the learned scholars among them with extensive knowledge, and the believers accept what is revealed to you (Oh Muhammad, SAW) as well as what was revealed before you. Those who perform the ´salat´ diligently, pay the zakat, and believe in Allah and the afterlife, are actually the ones to whom We will grant the greatest of rewards
4|163|We sent the revelation to you, just like We inspired Nooh, and the other prophets after him; (just like) We inspired Ibraheem Ismail, Ishaque, Yaqub and the tribes, Jesus, Ayub, Yunus, Haroon and Sulaiman. We gave Da´ood the book of ´Zaboor´ (the Psalms)
4|164|(We sent inspiration to) the messengers We have mentioned to you earlier, and (also to) the messengers We never mentioned to you. (But) with Musa, Allah spoke directly _ (not just through angels, or by inspiration)
4|165|Messengers were the bearers of good news and (dire) warnings. After the messengers, mankind should have no pleas or pretext to offer before Allah; and Allah is the most Powerful and the Wisest
4|166|(Skeptics may doubt), but Allah Himself testifies to (the truth of) what He has revealed to you, (Oh Muhammad, SAW). He has sent to you this revelation with His (unerring and infallible) knowledge. The angels testify (to that fact) also! And Allah suffices as the Witness
4|167|Indeed, those who disbelieve and hinder (others) from the path of Allah have lost their way, and have strayed far away
4|168|Allah will not forgive those who disbelieve and do wrong. He will not guide them on to the road (to salvation)
4|169|Instead (He will lead them along) the road to hell. They will stay there forever. That is really easy for Allah
4|170|Oh mankind! The messenger has brought you the truth from your Lord. So, believe! (It is) better for you. But if you deny, then remember that everything in the heavens and on earth belongs to Allah, and Allah is the all-Knowing, the Wisest
4|171|Oh People of the book! Do not (overstate and) exaggerate your religious beliefs; do not say anything except the truth about Allah. The Messiah, Jesus son of Mary was in fact (nothing more than) the messenger of Allah and His word which He cast upon Mary. (Jesus was) a soul created by Him. So, believe in Allah and His messenger. Do not say (that Allah is) three! Desist! It is better for you (if you desist). Verily, Allah is (only) One. He is (too glorified and) too exalted to have a son. Everything in the heavens and on earth belongs to Him. Allah suffices as a Disposer of all matters and things! (He needs no mediator)
4|172|Never was (Jesus) the Messiah, too arrogant to be treated as the created servant of Allah, nor are the angels who are the closest (to Allah). He will soon summon to Himself all those who scornfully avoid worshipping Him
4|173|Allah will award to the fullest extent the due rewards to those who believe and do the righteous deeds; and (then) by His grace, He will grant them even more (of His bounties). He will inflict a painful punishment upon (all) those who acted arrogantly and refrained from worshipping Him. Other than Allah, they will not find a friend or anyone to help
4|174|Oh mankind! (This Qur´an) _ the (incontrovertible) proof has come to you from your Lord. We have revealed to you (the beacon) _ the manifest light
4|175|Soon, He will admit into His mercy and His grace (all) those who believe in Him and hold fast on to Him. He will guide them towards Himself, _ (towards) the straight path
4|176|People seek your verdict. Say, "Allah gives you instructions concerning the inheritance of distant relatives. If a man passes away and has no (living parent or) child, but has a sister, then she inherits half of what he leaves behind. (Similarly) he would inherit from his sister, if she was childless. If a man was survived by two sisters (and no direct heir) they both would inherit two-thirds of what he leaves behind. If the deceased had (no direct heirs, but) brothers and sisters, then the share of the male shall be equal to the share of two females. Allah clarifies matters for you, lest you go astray. Allah is very well Aware of all things
5|1|Oh you who believe! Abide by your pledges. Made lawful for you (to eat), are all (herbivorous) animals reared as cattle, except those being mentioned (hereunder). Hunting of game is prohibited (during pilgrimage: Hajj and Umrah) while you are wearing the attire of a pilgrim (the Ihram). Of course Allah orders what He pleases
5|2|Oh you who believe! Do not violate the sacred rituals of Allah: the sacred (months of pilgrimage), the sacrificial animals, the garlanded animals pledged as offerings, and the people flocking the sacred house seeking the grace and approval of their Lord. You may hunt once you take off the ´ihram´ _ the ritual attire of pilgrimage. Do not let your hatred (and prejudice) against a nation _ a nation that once forbade you to enter the sacred mosque _ cause you to become unjust and commit excesses. Assist and support each other in matters of virtue and piety. Do not help each other in sin and transgression. Fear Allah! Allah is very severe in (inflicting) punishment
5|3|Forbidden for you (to eat) are (unslaughtered) dead animals, blood, the flesh of swine and animals slaughtered in the name of beings other than Allah. (Also forbidden are) animals that die as a result of strangulation, violent blows or fall from a height, as well as animals gored to death or (partially) eaten by wild beasts _ unless you salvage (and slaughter) them (before they die). Also forbidden are animals slaughtered before idols, altars and monuments (dedicated to beings other than Allah) as well as meat distributed by resorting to raffle. These are sins. Today, the unbelievers have given up hope about (wishing) your faith (away). Do not fear them; fear me! I have this day perfected your way of life for you, and I have completed My favor upon you. I have chosen Islam _ (submission) _ to be your religion. If one is compelled by hunger (to eat the forbidden food) _ and not by a desire to deviate and debauch _ then of course Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
5|4|They seek to know what is made lawful for them. Say, "Lawful for you (to eat) are (all) the wholesome (and pure) things. (Also lawful is) the game caught by the birds or beasts of prey trained by you according to what Allah has taught you. (You may) eat what they fetch for you, and mention the name of Allah over it. Be afraid of (violating the laws of) Allah. Indeed, Allah is very swift in calling to account
5|5|This day all wholesome things are made lawful for you. The food of the people of the scriptures is lawful for you and your food is lawful for them. Permissible for you are the chaste believing women and the chaste women of the people of the scriptures _ to enter into wedlock, not illegal sexual liaisons (secret or otherwise) or as intimate female companions (girlfriends) _ provided you give them their nuptial dues. Fruitless are the deeds of anyone who denies faith. In the life-to-come, he will be the loser
5|6|Oh you who believe! Before you rise for ´salat´ (for prayers), wash your face and your hands up to your elbows, run your (wet) hands across your head, and (wash) your feet up to the ankles. Clean yourself (by bathing) if you are unclean (following a sexual experience). In case you are ill, or on a journey, or if you have been to the toilet, or if you have had (sexual) contact with (your) women and you do not find water to clean yourself, then perform ´tayyamum´. Find a (rock or a) slab of earth and (after touching it) run your hands over your face and hands. Allah does not want to burden you with inconveniences. Rather, He wants to purify you and complete His blessings upon you. Perhaps, you would be grateful
5|7|Bear in mind the blessings Allah bestowed upon you _ His covenant by which He has bound you; (you ratified that covenant), when you said, "We hear and we obey." Fear Allah and do your duty! Indeed, Allah has full knowledge of even the secrets that exist in the heart
5|8|Oh you who believe! Remain steadfast and be the just and upright witness for Allah. Do not let your hatred (and prejudice) for a people compel you to be unfair. Be just! That is closer to righteousness. And Fear Allah! Indeed, Allah is well Aware of what you do
5|9|Allah has promised forgiveness and a rich reward for those who believe and do righteous deeds
5|10|And (He has promised that) those who disbelieve and deny Our signs shall be the companions of hell
5|11|Oh you who believe! Call to mind the blessings of Allah upon you when a nation had tried to lay their hands upon you, but He restrained their hands (and kept them) from (attacking) you. Fear Allah! In Allah (alone) should the believers place their trust
5|12|Allah certainly had the (sacred) covenant with the children of Israel. And We had appointed twelve (tribes and twelve) leaders among them. Allah said, "I will be with you, provided you establish ´salat´, pay the ´zakat´, believe in My messengers and honor and assist them, and advance a (sincere) virtuous loan to Allah. I will rid you of your sins (and your faults and flaws). I will certainly usher you into paradise through which run the rivers. If, despite the covenant, anyone of you disbelieves, then he will definitely go astray and deviate from the straight path of piety and righteousness
5|13|Since they breached their covenant, We placed a curse on them and We let their hearts grow hard (and callous). They lift the words (of their scriptures) out of context and they have forgotten a good part of the advice they were given. Except a few of them, you will always hear about the treachery and deceit committed by them. So, excuse them and bear with them. Indeed, Allah loves the pious
5|14|And We (also) made a covenant with those who call themselves Christians. They (too) forgot much of what they were reminded of. So We fomented and fuelled hostility and hatred among them till the Day of Judgment. Then, (at that time), Allah will tell them about (all) their handiwork (of treachery and deceit)
5|15|Oh you, the people of the book! Our messenger has now come to you. He clarifies for you a lot of things in your scriptures, those that you had concealed from others; and he overlooks a lot (of your misdeeds). A beacon (of guidance) has come to you! The illuminating book from Allah
5|16|With it, Allah leads anyone who seeks His pleasure, to the path of peace and serenity. By His grace, He brings them out of the depth of darkness into light, and guides them on to the straight path
5|17|Those who said that the Messiah, (Jesus), son of Mary is God Himself (or god incarnate) have indeed committed a sacrilege. Say, "Does anyone possess even a bit of power to do anything against Allah? What if He wants to destroy the Messiah, (Jesus) son of Mary, his mother and all the living beings on the surface of the earth? The heavens and the earth and all else in between belong to Allah. He creates what He wills, and Allah is able to will everything
5|18|(Both) the Jews and the Christians say, "We are the children of Allah and we are dearer to Him than all others." Ask them, "Then, why does He punish you (and makes you pay) for your sins. In fact, you are humans like all others He has created. He forgives whom He wants, and He punishes whom He wants! To Him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and everything else between them. Towards Him is the final return (of all beings)
5|19|Oh you, the people of the book! After a long pause (of about six hundred years) between messengers, there has now come to you Our messenger (Muhammad, SAW) who clarifies matters for you. Lest you should say, "No bearer of good news and no warner had ever come to us!" The bearer of good news and the warner has indeed come to you now! Allah has the power to do all things
5|20|And remember when Musa said to his people, "Oh my people! (Always) remember the (special) favor of Allah upon you: He raised prophets among you, set you up as the rulers in the land, and (above all) He granted you that which He had not granted anyone in the world before you
5|21|Oh my people, go to the holy land that Allah has decreed for you. Do not turn your backs to retreat. Else, you will be the losers
5|22|They said, "Oh Musa! A mighty people _ (sturdy and savage) _ live there. We will not enter that land unless they depart from there. Once they leave, then of course we will go into that land
5|23|The two men whom Allah had blessed, and who were among those who feared (Allah) said, "Go right past the gate (into their land) and attack. Once you enter their land, you shall certainly be victorious. If you are really the believers, you should place your trust in Allah
5|24|They replied, "Oh Musa, we will certainly not enter that land, so long as those people are there. You go with your Lord and wage the war. Here, we will sit (and await your return) right here
5|25|(Musa) said, "Oh my Lord, of course I only have influence over myself and my brother. So set us apart from the evil (disobedient) people
5|26|(Their Lord said), "This land shall now be forbidden to them for the next forty years. (During that period) they will wander about in the land _ (homeless and lost in the desert). So do not grieve over the evil (rebellious) people
5|27|Recite to them the true tale of the two sons of Adam. Each of them sacrificed and made an offering (to Allah). The offering of one was preferred and accepted while that of the other was not. He said, "I will kill you." The other replied, "Allah, in fact, accepts only the offering of the righteous
5|28|If you lay your hand on me to kill me, I will still not raise my hand to kill you. I really do fear Allah, the Lord of the universe
5|29|I prefer to have you assume all my sins along with your own. Then you will become the inmate of the hell! And that is the just retribution for the aggressors
5|30|His (evil) soul acceded to the murder of his brother. And he killed his brother and became one of those who incurred a real loss
5|31|Then, Allah sent a crow there. It scratched the ground and showed him how he might (bury and) hide his brother´s corpse. He said (to himself), "Oh woe to me! I couldn´t even be like this crow! I couldn´t (figure out how to) hide my brother´s corpse." He was filled with remorse
5|32|For that reason, We decreed for the children of Israel, "If someone kills a human being _ unless as a penalty for murder, or unless it is to prevent the spread of corruption in the world _ it is as if he has killed the entire humanity. And if someone saves a life, it is as if he has saved the entire humanity. Certainly, (all) Our messengers had brought to them the clear (irrefutable) proofs. Despite that, most people in the world continue to commit (outrageous) excesses
5|33|It is but a befitting penalty for those spreading corruption in the world and waging a war against Allah and His messenger, that they be killed or crucified; or that their hands and feet be cut off on opposite sides, or that they be banished from the land. That is the disgrace they deserve in this world. But in the life-to-come they shall face the severest (most awful) punishment
5|34|Except those who return (to Islam) and repent before you gain an upper hand over them. Be aware! Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
5|35|Oh you who believe! Fear Allah (and be dutiful). Seek the means to get closer to Him; and strive your utmost for His cause. Perhaps, you will prosper
5|36|Even if the unbelievers had all the wealth in the world _ and that much more to go with it _ to offer as ransom against the doom of the Day of Judgment, it will not be accepted from them. Theirs shall be the painful punishment
5|37|They would yearn to come out of the hellfire, but they shall not emerge from it (ever). Their torment shall stay with them (forever)
5|38|And cut off the hand of the thief, whether a man or a woman. It is the punishment for what they committed. An exemplary punishment from Allah, and Allah is the Mightiest, the Wisest
5|39|But if someone (relents and) repents his evil deeds and mends his ways, then of course Allah will accept his repentance. Indeed, Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
5|40|Do you not know that it is Allah to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth? He can punish whom He wants, and He may forgive whom He pleases. Allah has the power to do anything
5|41|Oh messenger! Do not let those who rush to reject (the truth) cause you any grief. Among them are those who say, "We believe!" by their tongue, while their hearts do not believe. Among them are (many) Jews who listen solely for the sake of lying (later on). They spy for others who do not come to you. They (misquote you and) change the words out of context. (To their followers) they say, "Accede and accept if you are told such and such, and be weary if you are told anything different." You (Oh Muhammad, SAW) have no authority at all to help the one whom Allah wants to (tempt and) test through an ordeal. They are among those whose hearts Allah has chosen not to cleanse and purify. Disgrace (and defeat) is their lot in this world, and in the life-to-come they shall face the severest (most awful) punishment
5|42|They listen (and spy) merely to lie, and they eat (and live off) the forbidden things! If they come to you and ask you to arbitrate matters concerning them, you may do so, or decline. They cannot harm you a bit if you ignore them. However, if you opt to decide their disputes, then be fair and equitable. Indeed, Allah loves those who are just
5|43|Why do they come to you for judgment? They have the Torah with them, and it does contain the commandments of Allah. Yet they ignore it. In fact, these people are not the believers
5|44|Surely, it was We Who revealed the Torah with its guidance and the light. The prophets _ all of whom had submitted (to the will of Allah) _ judged the Jews according to it. So did the rabbis and the scholars. They were entrusted with the task of preserving the book of Allah. To that fact they are the witnesses! So do not be afraid of people; rather fear Me!" (Oh Jews), do not trade away My revelations for a paltry price _ (the worldly gain). Those who fail to direct their affairs according to what Allah has revealed, are indeed the unbelievers
5|45|In the Torah, We had prescribed for them (the principle): A life for a life, an eye for an eye, a nose for a nose, an ear for an ear, and a tooth for a tooth. And for wounds inflicted, a fair retaliation is proper (and due). But if the victim forgoes (the right to retaliate), then that act of charity would be the atonement for his sins. Unjust and evil are those who fail to direct their affairs according to what Allah has revealed
5|46|And We caused Jesus, son of Mary to follow in the footsteps of the prophets. He confirmed the scriptures _ the Torah, that was there before him. To him, We gave the Gospels which confirmed the guidance and the light revealed in the earlier book _ the Torah. It contained the guidance and the admonition for the pious
5|47|The people of the Gospel should decide their affairs according to what Allah has revealed in the Gospel. Wicked and evil are those who fail to render judgment according to what Allah has revealed
5|48|And, (Oh Muhammad, SAW) We have revealed to you the truth in this book _ (the Qur´an). It confirms the scriptures that were (revealed) before it, and it supercedes them. So judge between them according to what Allah has revealed to you. Do not deviate from the truth that has come to you, by yielding to their whims and wishes. For each (of the three groups) we laid down the law and a prescribed program. Had Allah wanted, He could have made you (all) into a single nation. But (He did not), so He may test you all according to what He has granted you. So rush towards _ and compete with each other for _ the righteous deeds. Towards Allah shall you all return! Then, He will tell you about all that you used to dispute
5|49|So judge between them according to what Allah has revealed to you, and do not follow their whims and wishes. Beware of them, lest they entice you away from anything Allah has revealed to you. If they turn away, you would know that in fact Allah intends to inflict a suffering upon them for some of their sins. Indeed, most people are disobedient (and wicked)
5|50|Do they, then, seek the rules (and rites) of the (pagan) ignorance (of earlier days)? For a nation with faith, who could be a better Judge (and Guide), if not Allah
5|51|Oh you who believe! Do not accept the Jews and the Christians as your friends. They are each other´s friends. Whoever befriends them is actually one of them. Indeed Allah does not guide the unjust people
5|52|Yet, you will see that those with disease (of doubt) in their heart would (always) rush to (befriend) them. They say, "We are concerned that the fortunes will change and a disaster will strike us." But perhaps Allah will grant you victory, or grant you another favor by His grace. Then, these people would feel sorry for the secrets they hold within their hearts
5|53|The believers will say, "Are these the ones who swore by Allah so solemnly that indeed, they will stand by you?" Their deeds came to naught and they turned out to be the real losers
5|54|Oh you, the believers! If anyone of you forsakes (and renounces) his faith, (he should know that) Allah will soon bring another people (in your place). Those whom He loves, and who would love Him! They would be lenient and tolerant towards the believers, and stern and unyielding with the unbelievers. They would strive their utmost for the cause of Allah, and would not fear the censure of the critics and the faultfinders. Such is the grace of Allah, which He bestows upon whom He wills. Allah is Boundless and Infinite, and all-Knowing
5|55|In fact, your patron and protector can only be Allah, His messenger and other believers _ those who establish the ´salat´, pay the ´zakat´, and kneel humbly (before Allah)
5|56|Those who accept Allah, His messenger and other believers as their patrons and protectors (will find that) only the party of Allah will triumph
5|57|Oh you who believe! Do not accept as your friends those who mock your faith and treat it as a joke, whether they are among those given the book before you (the Christians and the Jews), or other unbelievers. Fear Allah (exclusively) if you really are the believers
5|58|As you sound the call for (people to come to) ´salat´, they cut jokes and make fun of it. That is because they are a people who do not use their reason
5|59|Say, "Oh people of the book! Are you hostile and vengeful towards us just because we believe in Allah, and that which was revealed to us, and revealed before us? Indeed, most of you are truly wicked
5|60|(Say), "Shall I tell you about the recompense from Allah which is certainly far worse? (Deserving a worse fate are): those whom Allah has cursed, those upon whom fell the wrath of Allah, those whom Allah turned into monkeys and pigs, and the devotees of the arrogant and the evil. Their plight is the worst; they are the farthest away from the straight path
5|61|When they come to you they say, "We believe" but in fact they came with disbelief (and doubt), and they left much the same way. Allah is well aware of everything they conceal
5|62|You see most of them hurrying (happily and eagerly) towards sin and transgression. They consume forbidden (food and illegitimate) gains. Despicable indeed is what they have been doing
5|63|Why do their rabbis and their religious scholars not forbid them from uttering sinful (blasphemous) words, and from consuming prohibited (food and illegitimate) gains? Despicable, indeed, is what they devise
5|64|The Jews say, "Allah´s hands are shackled." On the contrary, their (own) hands are chained and restrained; and accursed are they for what they say. In fact, His hands are unimpeded and outstretched; He dispenses (His bounties) as He wills. The fact is, what your Lord has revealed to you has rather increased the (attitude of) rebellion and disbelief in most of them. (Therefore), We have instilled hatred and hostility among them till the day of resurrection. Whenever they foment the flames of war, Allah snuffs them out. They (always) strive to spread corruption in the world. Allah does not like those who spread corruption
5|65|Had the people of the book believed and feared, We would have rid them of their sins (and their faults and flaws), and (We) would have ushered them into the blessing-filled paradise
5|66|Had they put into practice the Torah, the Gospel, and other revelations sent to them by their Lord, they would have received bounties from (the heavens) above and from (the earth) under their feet. Some of them do pursue the right course, but what most of them practice is evil
5|67|Oh messenger! Proclaim (and spread far and wide) the revelation sent to you by your Lord. If you fail to do that, you would have failed to convey the message. Allah will protect you against (the mischief of) mankind. Allah certainly does not guide the nation that disbelieves
5|68|Say, "Oh people of the book! You are not at all rightly guided unless you put into practice the Torah, the Gospel, and other revelations sent to you by your Lord." (Oh Muhammad, SAW) the fact is, what your Lord has revealed to you has rather increased the (attitude of) rebellion and disbelief in most of them. Do not grieve or feel sorry for the unbelieving nation
5|69|(Oh) those (of you) who believe, and those who became the Jews, the Sabians and the Christians! Whoever believes in Allah, the Last Day, and does the righteous deeds shall have no fear. Nor shall he ever grieve (or be sorry)
5|70|We certainly took a solemn pledge from the children of Israel, and sent messengers towards them. But they disbelieved (and disobeyed) whenever the messengers brought them a command that was against their wishes and desires. Some of the messengers they rejected and belied, others they (rebelled against and) killed
5|71|They assumed that they would never be tried (or punished). So they opted to be blind and (turned a) deaf (ear). Even then, Allah forgave them (repeatedly). Yet, most of them stayed blind and deaf. Allah observes everything they do
5|72|Those who say, ´Allah is actually Christ, son of Mary´ have most certainly committed a blasphemy. Christ had said, "Oh children of Israel worship Allah, my Lord and your Lord! In fact Allah has banned paradise for anyone who associates partners with Allah. Fire shall be his abode. The evildoers shall have no helpers
5|73|Those who say, "Allah is the third of three (the Trinity)" have most certainly committed a blasphemy. There is no god except the One true God _ Allah! A painful punishment will surely torment those disbelievers who do not quit making such (blasphemous) statements
5|74|Why don´t they repent and turn to Allah for forgiveness? Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
5|75|Christ, son of Mary was no more than a messenger! Many messengers have passed before his time. His mother was a righteous woman and (like all mortals) both of them had to eat (to live). See how clear have We made Our signs for them! Yet, see how they wander astray
5|76|Say, "Instead of Allah, do you worship beings that have no ability (at all) either to harm you or grant you benefits? Allah (on the other hand) hears-all and knows-all
5|77|Say, "Oh people of the book, do not (overstate and) exaggerate anything in your faith. Do not stretch (and falsify) the truth. Do not be swayed by the whims and conjectures of the earlier nations, who themselves strayed and misled many. They are far removed from the straight (and steady) path
5|78|The disbelievers of the children of Israel were cursed by the tongue of David, and of Jesus son of Mary. This is because they (disobeyed and) strayed beyond the bounds
5|79|They failed to forbid each other from committing the wrongful wicked deeds. What they used to do was definitely hideous
5|80|(Today) you will find that most of them have taken the unbelievers as their allies. Evil indeed is what their souls have (attained and) sent ahead (for reckoning). Allah´s wrath is upon them, and they shall stay in the torment forever
5|81|If they had believed in Allah, the prophet, and the revelations sent to them, they would not have taken the unbelievers as their friends. But many of them are wicked
5|82|You will find that, compared to any other people, the Jews and the idolaters are definitely more hostile towards the believers. You will (also) find that for the believers, (the least hostile and) the friendliest people are those who say, "We are Christians". This is because, among them are many learned persons, monks and others who are not proud
5|83|When they listen to the revelations received by the messenger (Muhammad, SAW), you will see their eyes overflowing with tears. They recognize the truth and cry out, "Our Lord, we believe! Include us among those who bear witness
5|84|Why should we not believe in Allah and the truth that has come to us? We are indeed eager for our Lord to count us among the righteous people
5|85|Because of what they said, Allah would reward them with paradise, through which run the rivers. There, they will live forever! Such is the reward for the righteous
5|86|While those who reject and refuse to believe Our revelations shall be the people of the hellfire
5|87|Oh you who believe! Do not deny yourself anything wholesome that Allah has made lawful for you. Do not exceed the limit. Indeed Allah does not like (the transgressors) _ those who trespass beyond the bounds
5|88|Partake of the lawful and wholesome sustenance Allah has granted you. Fear Allah, in Whom you (profess to) believe
5|89|Allah will not hold you responsible for whatever is not meant or deliberate in your oaths. But He will take you to task for whatever you swear to and pledge in earnest. The penalty for that, (breaking your pledge), consists of either the feeding of ten poor people with the food you would give your own family on an average (day), or providing them with clothing; or the freeing of a slave. The one who cannot afford any of that, may observe fasts for three days. That is the atonement for breaching your sworn pledges. So observe and abide by your oaths. Thus, Allah makes His message manifest for you, so you would be grateful
5|90|Oh you who believe! The liquor (and all intoxicants), the games of chance, idols (and shrines), and all divining devices _ (lots, cards, dices, crystal balls) _ are the filthy handiwork of Shaitan, stay away from them, so that you may succeed
5|91|In fact, by means of intoxicants and gambling, Shaitan seeks to sow hatred and hostility among you, and seeks to keep you from the remembrance of Allah and the ´salat´. So, will you quit (these vices) now
5|92|Obey Allah, obey the messenger and beware! Should you turn away, remember that Our messenger is responsible only to convey and make the message manifest
5|93|The believers who acted righteously bear no sin for anything they ate (in the past), so long as they are dutiful (now), stay steadfast in belief and do the right thing. Therefore, be mindful of your duties and believe. Again, fear Allah and be righteous
5|94|Oh you who believe! Allah will surely put you through a trial (during the pilgrimage) by letting the game animals wander within your easy grasp, and within the range of your spears. Thus Allah will mark those who fear Him, despite the fact that they are unable to see Him. There shall be a painful punishment for anyone who strays beyond the bounds thereafter
5|95|Oh you who believe! Do not kill (or hunt) a game animal while you are in a state of ´Ihram´ _ (the attire of pilgrimage). The penance for anyone of you who hunts (during ´Ihram´) is an offering at the Kaaba similar to what was killed _ as judged by two just men among you. The atonement (for that act) is the feeding of the poor, or fasting for an equivalent number of days, so he may taste the consequence of his evil act. Allah forgives whatever has happened in the past, but He will exact retribution if anyone repeats (the offense). Allah is the most Powerful; He is the Lord of Revenge
5|96|Lawful for you to hunt is the fish _ the game from the sea (or other bodies of water) to eat or to carry with the caravan. But, so long as you stay in ´Ihram´, the game animals of the land are prohibited for you. Fear Allah, towards Whom you would be gathered (for reckoning)
5|97|Allah has appointed the ´Kaaba´, the hallowed House, as a symbol (of solidarity and security) for (all) mankind, and (it is He Who has appointed) the sacred month, the sacrificial animals, and the animals garlanded as a mark of offering (at the ´Kaaba´). Thus, you would know that Allah is well aware of all that exists in the heavens and on earth. Allah has the (complete and comprehensive) knowledge of every (single) thing
5|98|Know it well! Allah is very severe in (inflicting) punishment and He is the most Forgiving, the most Merciful
5|99|The messenger is duty bound only to convey the message. Allah knows what you disclose as well as what you conceal
5|100|Say, "The evil and the virtuous cannot be equal, even though the abundance of evil pleases and fascinates you." So fear Allah, Oh you endowed with (reason and) intellect. Perhaps you will prosper
5|101|Oh you who believe! Do not ask questions about matters which, if disclosed, can only cause you hardship. And disclosed they would be, if you ask about these matters while the Qur´an is being revealed. Allah will overlook that (this time). Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Forbearing
5|102|A nation prior to you had asked questions concerning such matters. As a result they lost their faith
5|103|Allah did not sanction (a special status for) the ´Bahirah´, the ´Saiba´, the ´Wasilah´, or the ´Haam´ _ (animals with characteristics revered by the pagans). Rather, the unbelievers made up such lies about Allah. Most of them just have no sense
5|104|When they are told, "Come to what Allah has revealed, come to the prophet" they say, "Whatever we found our forefathers doing is good enough for us." Even though their forefathers knew nothing at all, nor were they guided
5|105|Oh you who believe! You are liable for your own selves. Those who go astray cannot harm you a bit, provided you follow the guidance. Towards Allah is the ultimate return for all of you. Then, He will tell you everything you used to do
5|106|Oh you who believe! If you find death close at hand, and you want to make out your last will, appoint as witnesses, two just men among you _ or among other people, should the calamity strike while you happen to be traveling. If you are in doubt (about the witnesses) detain them after ´salat´ and let them swear by Allah saying, "We will not trade our testimony for worldly gain, nor will we hide the testimony of Allah. Else we would be the sinners
5|107|Later, if it comes to light that the two witnesses merit (the suspicion of) sin, then let two others from among the rightful heirs (of the deceased) take the place of the earlier witnesses. Let them swear by Allah (saying), "Our testimony is truer and more valid than their testimony, and we do not stray beyond the bounds (of truth). Else, we would be the evil doers
5|108|That way, it is more likely that they will bear witness (properly and truthfully) as they should. They will fear that sworn testimony of others might contradict their own sworn testimony. Fear Allah and listen (carefully)! Allah does not guide the evil disobedient nation
5|109|The day Allah assembles (all) the messengers, He will ask them, "What response did you receive (from your people)?" They would say, "We have no knowledge. Indeed, You (alone) are the All-knower of all things hidden and unseen
5|110|(That day) Allah will say, "Oh Jesus, son of Mary! Recall the favors I bestowed upon you and your mother. I aided you with the Holy Spirit (the angel Gibrael), and you spoke to mankind as an infant, and also as an adult. I taught you the art of writing, and the insight; and the Torah and the Gospel. You shaped clay into the likeness of a bird, and as you breathed into it, by My leave it turned into a real bird. You restored the sight of the born blind, and you cured lepers by My leave. You brought the dead back to life by My leave. (Remember also that) I restrained the children of Israel and kept them from (hurting) you. (Although) you brought them the clear incontrovertible proofs, yet the disbelievers among them (dismissed all the proofs and) said, "This is nothing but evident magic
5|111|When I inspired the disciples (of Jesus), "Believe in Me and My messengers", they said, "We believe! Bear witness that we are the obedient ones
5|112|When the disciples said, "Oh Jesus, son of Mary! Can your Lord send down for us the table spread (with food) from the heaven?" (Jesus) said, "Fear Allah, if you really are the believers
5|113|They said, "We wish to eat such a meal so that our minds may rest easy and we may know (for sure) that you had told us the truth. So that we may bear witness to that (sign)
5|114|Jesus, son of Mary prayed, "Oh Allah, Our lord! Send down to us from the heavens a table spread (with food). Let it be an ever recurring feast for us _ for the first and the last of us. Let it be a sign from You. And give us (the sustenance) _ our (daily) bread. For, You are (absolutely) the very Best of the providers
5|115|Allah said, "I am going to send it down for you. But if any of you disbelieves after that, I will punish him with the torment the like of which I have never inflicted upon any one in the universe
5|116|Allah will say (on the Day of Judgment), "Oh Jesus, son of Mary! Did you ever instruct people, "Worship me and my mother as two other gods along with Allah"? Jesus will answer, "Exalted are You! It is not my place to say anything I have no right (to say). Had I said that, You would have already known it. You know what is in my mind, while I do not know what is in Your mind. Indeed, You have (absolute) knowledge about (absolutely) everything hidden and unseen
5|117|I said to them only (and exactly) what You had commanded me to say, ´Worship Allah, my Lord and your Lord.´ I bore witness to what they did as long as I was among them. But, after You recalled me, You _ (and not me) _ were the Watcher over them. For, You are the Witness to every single thing
5|118|If You punish them, then they are of course Your servants. And if You forgive them, You are the Almighty, and the Wisest
5|119|Allah will say, "This day, the truthful shall receive the benefit of their truthfulness. Theirs shall be the paradise through which run the rivers. They shall live there forever. Allah is well pleased with them, and they are well pleased with Him. That is the greatest triumph
5|120|To Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and everything therein. He has (absolute) power over all things
6|1|All praise is for Allah Who created the heavens and the earth. He created deep darkness as well as light. Yet, those who disbelieve appoint others as equal to their Lord
6|2|It is He Who created you out of clay, then decreed a term (of life) for you (in this world). There is another scheduled appointment for you _ (the day of Resurrection) _ known (only) to Him. Yet, you doubt its occurrence
6|3|Allah is (the only God) in the heavens and on earth. He knows all your secrets, as well as everything you warrant and express. He knows all the deeds _ (good and bad) _ that you perform
6|4|Whenever a sign among so many (of His) signs reaches them, they react by turning away from it
6|5|Indeed, they have already rejected the truth when it came to them. Soon, the very event they used to mock will land upon them
6|6|Do they not see how many generations have We destroyed prior to them? We did not establish you in the land as firmly as We had established them. For them, We poured rain down from the sky and We ran rivers right through their land. Then, because of their sins, We destroyed all of them. In their place we started other nations
6|7|Even if We had sent you a book written on paper, and even if the unbelievers had touched and felt it with their own hands, they still would have said, "This is obviously a magic
6|8|They asked, "Why was an angel not sent down towards him (the prophet)?" Had We sent angels, the matter would have been decided and done with. Then, they would not be given the loose rein, and a leeway
6|9|If We had sent down an angel, We would have sent him as a human. Thus, they would have had doubts again, just like they do now
6|10|Certainly, many messengers have been mocked before you, but those who made fun of them were surrounded and overwhelmed by the very thing they used to mock
6|11|Say, "Move about in the land and observe how severe was the final outcome for all those who denied the truth
6|12|Ask them, "To whom belongs everything in the heavens and on earth?" Say, "To Allah!" He has mandated mercy upon Himself. He would most certainly (bring you back to life and) gather all of you together on the day of Resurrection. There is no doubt about it! Those who have incurred a severe loss, and have ruined themselves, are the ones who refuse to believe
6|13|To Him belongs everything that dwells in the night and the day. He hears-all, and knows-all
6|14|Say, "Shall I take anyone other than Allah as my protector, even though He is the Creator of the heaven and the earth? He feeds (all), is not (in need to be) fed (by anyone)." Say, "I have been ordered to be the first to submit." (My orders are) "Do not be among the Idolaters _ (those who join partners with Allah)
6|15|Say, "I am really afraid of the punishment of an awesome day, if I disobey my Lord
6|16|The one kept away from that (torment) has indeed been shown (the ultimate) mercy. That is the greatest triumph
6|17|If Allah chooses to inflict harm upon you, no one except He can provide relief. However, if He grants you a blessing, then of course He has power over all things
6|18|He holds an absolute and total control over His servants. He is the Wisest, and the most Aware
6|19|Ask them, "Whose testimony carries the most weight?" Say, "Allah is the witness between me and you. This Qur´an has been revealed to me, so that with it I may warn you _ and anyone it reaches. Can you honestly bear witness that there are other gods besides Allah?" Say, "I cannot bear witness to that!" Say, "In fact, He is the One and the only God, (Allah), and I am absolved of all blame for your act of associating partners with Him
6|20|(The Christians and the Jews) _ to whom We had given the scriptures earlier _ recognize this Qur´an (and this messenger) just like they know their own sons. Yet, those who have ruined themselves just would not believe
6|21|Who can commit a greater evil than the one inventing lies about Allah and rejecting His revelations? Indeed such culprits will never be successful (in the life-to-come)
6|22|That day, We will gather them all together and We will say to those who associate partners with Him, "Now, where are all those beings you used to claim as partners (of Allah)
6|23|Then, they will not have any recourse except to say, "(We swear) by Allah, our Lord, we did not associate partners (with Allah)
6|24|Observe, how they will lie against themselves. And the false gods they invent now, shall all vanish
6|25|And then, there are those among them who pretend to listen to you. We have wrapped their hearts in a thick veil, so they understand nothing. We have rendered their ears deaf (for the truth). They would not believe even if they see all the signs. To an extent that, they argue and dispute with you when they come to see you. The unbelievers say, "These are just legends invented by those gone by
6|26|They keep others from the truth and they stay away from it themselves. (By these actions) who else can they hurt (if not themselves)? But (of course) they do not realize
6|27|If only you could see them when they are made to stand by the hellfire. They will say, "Oh misery to us, if we could only return (to the life of this world)! This time around we would not deny the signs of our Lord. We would be the believers
6|28|Actually, the reality which was previously kept hidden from their vision, has now become apparent to them. If they are sent back they would revert back. They would commit exactly the same acts they had been forbidden. They are really the liars
6|29|They say, "This life of ours is it, and (after death) we are not going to be raised back (to life)
6|30|If you could only see them presented before their Lord (for reckoning). He will ask, "Is this not real?" They will reply, "Yes, Our lord! this is real!" He will say, "Now taste the punishment _ a consequence of your denial
6|31|The real losers, indeed are those who denied the meeting with their Lord! Once the hour (of Judgment) creeps up on them suddenly, they would say, "Alas! How negligent had we been!" And they would carry their burden of sins on their backs. Beware! Grave is the burden they carry
6|32|The life of this world is nothing more than play and pastime. The abode of the hereafter is certainly far better for the pious. Do you not understand
6|33|We do know that their remarks cause you grief. But it is not just you they are calling a liar. Rather, these evildoers have actually rejected the revelations of Allah
6|34|Certainly the messengers before you had also been called liars. They remained patient (and steadfast) despite the denials and persecution. Finally Our help arrived for them. Of course, nobody can revise or reverse the decisions (and decrees) of Allah! The tales of the (earlier) messengers have certainly reached you
6|35|If their attitude is so hard for you to bear, then dig a tunnel through the earth if you can; or find a ladder (to climb) up to the sky. Try and bring them the miracle (they demand). Had Allah so willed, He could have, (on His own), gathered all of them around His guidance. So, do not be like the foolish and the ignorant
6|36|In fact, only those who care to listen attentively can respond (to the call). As for the dead, Allah will bring them to life, and then they would be presented before Him (for reckoning)
6|37|They ask, "Why was a sign from his Lord not sent along with him." Say, "Of course, Allah has the power to bestow such a sign." But most of them have no knowledge
6|38|(A sign for you): all the animals and creatures moving on earth as well as all the birds flying in the air on their wings, exist as distinct species and families just like your own. We have not neglected to include anything in the book (of decrees). Finally, all of them would be gathered before their Lord
6|39|Those who reject Our revelations (and signs) are like the deaf and the dumb (groping) in the dark. Allah leads astray whom He wants; He shows the right path to whom He wants
6|40|Say, "What do you think? If you are truthful (answer this)! If Allah´s torment (in this world) or the hour (of Judgment) lands on you, would you implore and beseech any other being besides Allah
6|41|In fact, you would call Him and none else! And if He wills, He will answer your prayer and relieve you (of your problem). At that time, you will forget the partners you now associate with Him
6|42|We had certainly sent (messengers) to many nations before you. We inflicted those nations with adversity and suffering, so that they might (believe and) adopt humility
6|43|Why did they fail to (believe and) adopt humility when Our punishment struck them? On the contrary, their hearts grew (cold and) hard. Shaitan adorned and let their deeds seem adorable to them
6|44|Once they (completely ignored and) forgot what they were asked to remember, We flung open for them the gates of everything pleasant and prosperous. They were well pleased and contented with everything they were granted. Then We seized them unawares, and they sank into a state of (deep depression and) helplessness
6|45|Thus, the people who committed evil were weeded out completely; their roots were severed off. All praise is for Allah, the Lord of the universe
6|46|Say, "Have you (ever) considered? What if Allah took away your hearing and your sight, and sealed off your heart? Is there a god besides Allah, who could give you back these senses?" Observe, how We explain the revelations in detail. Yet, they turn away (disdainfully)
6|47|Say, "What do you think? What if the punishment of Allah creeps up on you surreptitiously, or lands on you openly? Will it ruin anyone other than those who do evil
6|48|We send the messengers only as the bearers of good news and as warners. So, whoever believes and corrects (his action and attitude) shall have no fear. Nor shall he ever grieve (or be sorry)
6|49|As a result of their sins, the torment will strike all those who reject Our (signs and) revelations
6|50|Tell them, "I do not say to you that I possess the treasures of Allah or the knowledge of the unseen future! And I do not claim to be an angel. I only just pursue and follow the revelation sent to me." Say, "Can a blind man and the one endowed with sight ever be equal? Do you then not ponder
6|51|With this (Qur´an), warn those who fear being gathered before their Lord (for reckoning). They shall have no protector or mediator other than Him! Perhaps, they would fear Him
6|52|Do not drive away those who invoke their Lord every morning and afternoon and seek His pleasure. You bear no responsibility for anything on their account. Nor shall they be held accountable for anything on your behalf. You would be the unjust, if you drive them away
6|53|Thus, We test some of them by means of others. That is why they say, "Are these the ones among us whom Allah has chosen over us?" Isn´t Allah better Aware of the grateful ones
6|54|When those who believe in Our revelations come to (visit) you say, "Assalam Alaikum (peace upon you)". Your Lord has decreed mercy (and compassion) upon Himself. Indeed, if any one of you commits a wrong deed (by mistake and) out of ignorance and thereafter repents and mends his ways, (he would find that) He is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
6|55|In this manner, We explain Our revelations in detail, so that the ways of the criminals would become (widely known and) well recognized
6|56|Say, "I have been forbidden to worship those beings you invoke other than Allah." Say, "I would certainly be (gravely) misguided if I follow your vain desires; I would not be on the right path
6|57|Say, "I have the clear proof from my Lord, while you have rejected it. The doom you so impatiently dare is not within my power to inflict. The decision rests solely with Allah. He declares the truth and He is the very Best of the judges
6|58|Say, "If I could inflict upon you the punishment you so eagerly dare, the matter between me and you would have (long) been settled. Allah is very well aware of the evil doers
6|59|He holds the keys to all the unseen (transcendental) mysteries _ (matters beyond human perception). Except Him, nobody knows about them. He knows everything that exists on the land and in sea. Not (even) a leaf falls (from a tree) without His explicit knowledge. Every single seed of grain, whether dry or moist _ (even that) lying in the dark recesses of the earth _ is (accounted for) in a clear register
6|60|It is He Who takes possession of your soul at night, and He knows everything you do by day. Then He lets you wake up for the next day. (This happens) till you complete the prescribed period _ (your life span). Finally, towards Him is your ultimate destination. At that time, He will tell you everything you used to do
6|61|He holds complete sway over His servants. He sends (angels to be the) guardians over you. Finally, when death comes to one of you, Our angels take full possession of his soul. They never neglect their duties
6|62|And then they would be presented before Allah, their real Master. Beware! The decision is exclusively His, and He is very swift in calling to accounts
6|63|Say, "When you entreat Him, secretly and with humility, who rescues you from all the dark dangers of the land and the sea? (They say), "If He rescues us from this, We would (forever) remain grateful
6|64|Say, "Allah it is Who rescues you from that and all other distresses. Yet, you associate partners with Him
6|65|Say, "He has the power to strike you with a torment coming down from (the sky) above you, or (rising up) from under your feet. Else, He may beset and bewilder you with internecine dissension and have you taste each other´s might and savagery." Observe, how We explain Our revelations in detail, so that they may understand
6|66|Your people have rejected it, even though it is the truth. Say, "I am not appointed a guardian over you
6|67|Every event has a preordained venue. Soon you will find out the truth
6|68|Avoid their company if you find them engaged in a derisive (and disparaging) conversation about Our revelations. Stay away until they change the subject. If Shaitan makes you forget, then part company with the wrongdoers when you do remember
6|69|The righteous bear no responsibility for the actions of others, though they must admonish (the wrongdoers). Perhaps, they will fear (Allah)
6|70|Stay away from those who treat their religion as nothing more than play and pastime. The life of this world has (dazzled and) deceived them. By (means of) this (Qur´an), call their attention to the fact that the soul is held in pledge against the deed it earns. They have no protector or mediators besides Allah. Absolutely, no ransom of any kind will be accepted in exchange for their deeds. Such ones would be held (responsible) for their deeds. Boiling water will be their drink, and because they used to deny, they will face a painful punishment
6|71|Say, "Shall we call others besides Allah _ others who can neither help nor harm us? After being guided by Allah, we would be making an about face and turning back to misguidance! In that case, we would be like the one enticed by Shaitan. He strays in the land confused and bewildered. His (sincere) friends call him towards guidance, saying, Come to us! Say, "Only Allah´s guidance is the (real) guidance. Our orders are to submit to the Lord of the universe
6|72|And (we are ordered) to establish ´salat´ and to be obedient to Him. For it is He, before Whom we shall all be gathered
6|73|It his He Who based the creation of the heavens and the earth upon the absolute truth. The day (of Resurrection) shall instantly come about as soon as He says (to it), "Be!" His word is the (infallible and the ultimate) truth. On the day the trumpet sounds, the rule and the judgment shall belong solely to Him. He knows the unseen and the seen. He is the Wisest and the most Aware
6|74|Remember when Ibraheem said to his father, Azar, "Do you take the idols to be your gods? Indeed, I think you and your nation are definitely in the wrong
6|75|Thus, We had Ibraheem glimpse the marvels of the heavens and the earth, so that he may believe with certainty
6|76|As the night covered him with darkness, he saw a star and remarked, "This is my Lord!" But when it set, he said, "I do not like those that set
6|77|As he saw the moon rising he said, "This is my Lord!" But when it went down he said, "I would surely be one of the misguided people, had my Lord not guided me
6|78|Then, as he saw the sun rising, he said, "This must be my Lord! This is the biggest!" But when it too set, he exclaimed "I (declare that I) have nothing to do with anything you associate with Allah
6|79|Indeed, I have turned my attention with exclusive devotion towards the One Who has created the heavens and the earth. I do not associate partners with Him
6|80|His nation began to argue with him. He said, "Do you argue with me concerning Allah? In fact, He has already guided me. I do not fear any of the beings you associate with Him. (They cannot do a thing) except whatever my Lord wills. My Lord´s knowledge transcends all matters. Won´t you bear this in mind
6|81|Why should I fear these beings you associate (with Allah)? In fact, you (should be, but) are not afraid of associating other beings with Allah. He has granted no approval for such an action. So, which of the two factions have a better right to peace and security, if you happen to know
6|82|Peace is actually for those who believe, and do not taint their beliefs with wrong deeds. They are the rightly guided
6|83|That was Our argument which We inspired Ibraheem to expound to his nation. We raise those to higher ranks whom We want! Indeed, your Lord is the Wisest and the all-Knowing
6|84|We gave him (descendants like) Ishaq and Yaqub. We guided both of them. Prior to that, We guided Nooh. Among his descendant were Da´ood, Sulaiman, Ayub, Yusuf, Musa and Haroon. Thus do We reward the righteous
6|85|And (We also guided) Zakariah, Yahya, Jesus, and Ilyas. They were all pious
6|86|And Ismail, Alyasa, Yunus, and Loot! We gave each one of them preference over the rest of mankind
6|87|And (We raised messengers) among their forefathers, their defendants and their brethren. We chose them and guided them to the straight path
6|88|Such is the guidance of Allah. He guides whom He wants among His servants. Had they, (any of the messengers mentioned above) set up partners (with Allah), all their deeds would have come to nothing
6|89|Such are the ones, to whom We gave the scriptures, the wisdom and the prophethood. Since they (their descendants _ the Jews and the Christians) refuse to believe (their own books), We have entrusted another nation with that (same message) _ those who do not disbelieve
6|90|They (the messengers mentioned above) are the ones whom Allah had guided. (Oh Muhammad, SAW), emulate and follow (as well as convey) the message (to others). Say, "I do not ask you for (a fee or) a reward for this. It is the reminder for the entire mankind
6|91|They did not value and venerate Allah as much as He rightfully deserves, when they said, "Allah has not revealed anything to any man!" Ask them, "Who revealed the book that Musa had brought to the people? The light and Guidance that you have transcribed on parchment! Some of it you display, but most of it you keep hidden. It taught you that, which neither you nor your forefathers knew!" (Say), "Allah!" Then leave them alone and let them stay engrossed in their meaningless and playful debates
6|92|We have revealed this book, (the Qur´an), as a blessing and as a confirmation of the book that came before it. So you may warn the mother of all towns, (Makkah), and those in its vicinity. Those believing in the life-to-come believe in this book, and they zealously and punctually guard their ´salat´
6|93|Who can be more evil than the one forging lies about Allah, and saying, "I have received revelation" when in fact he had not received a bit of revelation? Or the one who says, "I, too, can inspire and create (a text) similar to what Allah has revealed." If only you could see these wicked people going through the throes of death. The angels would approach them with outstretched hands, "(Time to) deliver your soul! Today you would undergo a most humiliating torture because of the untruthful and unfair things you used to utter about Allah. You used to reject His revelations disdainfully
6|94|You have now really come before Us all alone, just like We fashioned you in the first instance. You have left behind everything We had bestowed upon you (in your lifetime). Today, We do not see your intercessors with you, those you used to claim were your partners. Of course, all ties between you have been severed. Those you had relied upon have now vanished
6|95|Indeed, it is Allah Who splits (and initiates the germination of) the seeds of grain as well as the pit-stones of the fruit trees. He causes the living to emerge from the lifeless, and He brings out the lifeless from the living. Such is your Allah! So why are you being diverted away (from the truth)
6|96|It is He Who causes dawn to break out (from the pitch dark night). He has created the night for resting, and He has created the sun and the moon as measures (for the passage of time). Such is the destiny appointed by the most Powerful and the most Aware
6|97|It is He Who created the stars, so you may chart the course and find your way amidst the darkness in the land and the sea. Thus, We have explained Our signs in detail for the nation that realizes
6|98|It is He Who has brought you into existence out of a single being. He has appointed a (time and) place for you in this life, and (a time and) a place for your death. We have explained these signs in detail for a nation that understands
6|99|It is He Who rains water down from the sky. With that water, We bring out seedlings of all kinds, which We turn into dense green foliage and finally into thick clusters of grain. With that (same water) We produce date-trees and their heavy clusters of dates hanging low. We produce orchards of grapes, olives and pomegranates. They all appear similar and yet are different. Look at the trees when they bear fruit, and look at the process of its ripening. In it are indeed signs for a nation that believes
6|100|Although it is He Who created the jinn, yet they worship the jinn as partners of Allah. Without any (shred of) knowledge, they assign sons and daughters for Him. Sublime and Exalted is He, far above all that they ascribe to Him
6|101|He is the Creator and the Cause of the heavens and the earth. How might He have a son, unless He had a mate? He has created all (beings and) things, and He is well aware of every single thing
6|102|Such is Allah, your Lord! There is no god but He, the Creator of all (beings and) things! So worship Him (exclusively); He is the trustee over all things
6|103|Vision cannot perceive Him (at all). But He reaches (and illuminates) the vision. He is the most Subtle, and the most Aware
6|104|Proof has indeed come to you from your Lord. Now whoever cares to see shall do so for his own good, and whoever opts to stay blind does so to his own detriment. (Say), "I am not a guardian over you
6|105|Thus, We explain Our signs in different ways, so as to provide a proof for a nation that realizes. Lest they should say, "You have learned that (from books or teachers)
6|106|Follow that which has been revealed to you by your Lord. There is no god but Allah. Turn away from those who associate partners with Allah
6|107|Had Allah so willed, they would not have committed ´shirk´ _ (i.e. ascribed partners to Allah). We have not appointed you their keeper. Nor are you responsible for their actions
6|108|Do not abuse and vilify those whom they invoke besides Allah, lest they should retaliate and revile Allah out of ignorance. We have indeed made the deeds of each people appear adorable to them. Towards their Lord is their final destination. He will then tell them what they used to do
6|109|They swear by Allah very solemnly that they would certainly not refuse to believe, if a sign ever came to them. Say, "Signs are only within Allah´s power!" Does it not occur to you that they would not believe even if a sign came to them
6|110|We will turn their hearts and their visions away (from the truth), even as they had (turned away and) refused to believe it the first time. We will forsake them and let them wander about blindly in their rebellious arrogance
6|111|Even if We send angels towards them (as messengers), or cause the dead to speak to them (plainly), or present all the (unseen) things right before their eyes, they would still not believe _ unless (of course) Allah wills it so. Most of them act ignorantly
6|112|We have set up Shaitans _ among the jinn and the human kind _ as enemies against every prophet. They inspire and provoke each other with their suave and specious speech. They could not have done that, had your Lord so willed. So leave them alone with the falsehood they cook up
6|113|We let the heart of the unbelievers _those not believing in the life-to-come _ lean towards falsehood (and be titillated by it). Let them be contented with it, so they may amass all the evil deeds they please
6|114|Ask them, "Now, shall I seek someone other than Allah as a judge, even though it is He Who has revealed to you the detailed book (the Qur´an)?" Those to whom We had previously given the book, know well that it is indeed revealed by your Lord. That it is the absolute truth! So do not be among the skeptics
6|115|The word of Allah is perfectly fair and accurate. None can dare change His decrees. He hears-all and knows all
6|116|Most of the people of this world _ if you choose to follow them _ would lead you far away from the path of Allah. They merely pursue their presumptions; they just guess and speculate
6|117|Of course your Lord knows best those who have strayed from His path, and He knows quite well the rightly guided ones
6|118|If you (really) believe in His revelations, you should eat the meat (of the animals) slaughtered in the name of Allah
6|119|What keeps you from eating the meat (of the animals) slaughtered in the name of Allah? He has already detailed for you everything that is forbidden for you _ unless you are compelled by dire reasons. Of course, many mislead others without much knowledge, and because of their own lusts and longings. Your Lord knows the transgressors
6|120|Give up sin (in its entirety) _ in appearance as well as in essence. Those who commit sins would surely be punished according to what they had committed
6|121|Do not eat the meat (of the animals) over which the name of Allah is not invoked (at the time of its slaughter). That is an impious and an immoral act. Shaitan certainly incites his minions to engage you in arguments (about what is, and is not a sin). If you follow them you would surely become one of those who associate partners with Allah
6|122|Can he, upon whom We bestowed life _ he was lifeless (and faithless) prior to that _ as well as the light by which he moves, ever be like those who grope about in utter darkness and are unable to emerge? Thus, the deeds of the unbelievers have been made to appear adorable to them
6|123|Thus, We raised the prominent ones among the criminals in every town to play their tricks. But they do not realize that they are only playing their tricks against themselves
6|124|When a verse comes to them (from Allah) they say, "We will not believe unless we are given the kind (of sign) that the messengers of Allah were given." Allah knows best upon whom to bestow His message. Disgrace and humiliation before Allah, and a torment, will soon strike the criminals because of their scheming designs
6|125|Allah unlocks and exposes to Islam the heart of the one whom He wishes to guide. (Conversely) He constricts and squeezes the heart of the one whom He wishes to mislead _ squeezes it so hard, he feels as if he was surging up in the sky. Thus, Allah lobs filth upon those who do not believe
6|126|This is the path of Allah _ the straight path. We have explained Our revelations in detail for a nation that heeds
6|127|Theirs shall be the blissful abode with their Lord, and He will be their friend and protector because of what they do
6|128|On the day He gathers them all together (He will say), "Oh you, the species of jinn! A great many humans have you lured and led astray! Their allies among the human kind (would exclaim), "Our Lord, we did enjoy (and benefit from) each other´s alliance, and now we have completed the term you had appointed for us." Allah will say, "The hellfire is your home. You will live there forever, unless Allah wills otherwise. Indeed, your Lord is the Wisest and the most Aware
6|129|Thus, We will appoint the evildoers as each other´s comrades, because of what they had wrought
6|130|(Allah will say), "Oh the species of jinn and humans! Had the messengers from among your own kind not come to you? And (did they not) recite to you My revelations, and warn you about the meeting of this very day?" They will say, "(Yes, and) we bear witness against ourselves." The life of this world deceived them, and they will bear witness that they were indeed the unbelievers
6|131|(The messengers were sent) because your Lord would never destroy any town unjustly while its residents were unaware and uninformed
6|132|Each soul is ranked according to its deeds. Your Lord is not unaware of anything they do
6|133|Your Lord is Free of all wants; (He is) the Lord of Mercy. If He wants, He can wipe you out, and have another people _ whomever He wants _ succeed you, just as He raised you from the genes of a different nation
6|134|Of course, what you are being promised shall definitely occur! You are unable to prevent it
6|135|Say, "Oh my people, you do as you please! I will do my part! Soon you will find out, who gets the house of the hereafter. Evildoers will certainly not prosper
6|136|They assign a share for Allah out of the crops and cattle bestowed upon them by Him. They claim, "This (share) is for Allah, and that is for our partners (of Allah)." But seldom does their partners´ share reach Allah. However, Allah´s share frequently ends up with their partners. How despicable are their decisions
6|137|Their partners have even made infanticide adorable for many of these idolaters. These partners led them to their destruction, and obscured (and mystified) the matters of their faith. Had Allah so willed, they could not have done that. So leave them alone and let them continue to fabricate falsehood
6|138|Of their own accord, they (make certain rules and) declare, "(The meat of) this animal and (the crop of) that field are prohibited. No one can eat its (meat, fruit or) produce except whomever we allow." They prohibit certain animals to be employed for farm labor (or for burden). On certain other animals they do not invoke Allah´s name (at the time of their slaughter). They invent lies against Him! Soon He will punish them for the falsehood they invent
6|139|They Say, "The yield of certain cattle _ (be it milk or calf) _ is reserved for our males and is forbidden for our females." Yet men and women can both share the calf, if it is born dead. Soon We will punish them for all they (falsely) attribute (to Him). Indeed, He is the Wisest, the most Aware
6|140|Those who killed their children out of folly and the lack of knowledge, incurred a great loss. So did those who forbade themselves the blessings that Allah had bestowed upon them, those who fabricated lies about Allah. They have gone far astray; they are not on the right path
6|141|It is He Who has brought into being the orchards _ trellised and otherwise _ the date trees and the fields of crops. They all bear different taste. (He produces) the olives and the pomegranates which are similar in kind and different in taste. Eat their fruit as they ripen and pay the ´zakat´ on the day of harvest. Do not be wasteful. Indeed, He does not like those that are wasteful
6|142|(He created) some animals as beasts of burden, others for the sake of their flesh (and milk). Eat (the flesh of animals) Allah has granted you, and do not follow in the footsteps of Shaitan. He is really your professed enemy
6|143|(He has created) eight animals (you may eat): two are sheep _ (The ram and the ewe), and two are goats _ (the buck and the she-goat). Ask them, "Has He, (Allah), forbidden the males of these two species, or the females? And does the ban include the kids being carried by the females in their uterus? Tell me with proof, if you know
6|144|(Of the remaining four), two are camels _ (male and female), and the other two are cattle_ (the ox and the cow). Ask them, "Has He, (Allah) forbidden the males of these two species, or the females? And does the ban include the calves being carried by the females in their uterus? Were you really present there when Allah gave those instructions? Then, who could be more evil than the person inventing lies about Allah, and leading people astray, without any knowledge?" Indeed, Allah does not guide the nation of evildoers
6|145|(Oh Muhammad, SAW) say, "In the revelation sent to me, I find nothing that prohibits anyone from eating anything except: the (unslaughtered) dead animal, blood poured forth (at the time of slaughter), the flesh of swine because it is filthy, and the sinful food presented as an offering to beings, other than Allah. But if one is compelled by dire need _ and not by haughtiness or habit _ then of course Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
6|146|For those who became Jews, We had forbidden all animals clad with claws. We forbade them the fat of the ox and the goat, except what the animal carries around its back and the fat that sticks to the bones. We did that to punish them for their rebellion, and We certainly tell the truth
6|147|And if they call you a liar, then say, "Your Lord is limitless in His Mercy! His punishment against the guilty people shall not be set aside
6|148|Those who set up partners (to worship) besides Allah will surely say, "Had Allah so willed we and our forefathers could neither have set up partners with Allah, nor prohibited anything (against His will)." People prior to them had disbelieved in that same manner, right until they tasted Our torment. Say, "If you have any specific knowledge then bring it out and show us. You merely pursue your presumptions! You just guess and speculate
6|149|Say, "Allah has the (final and) infallable argument. Had He so willed, He could surely have guided all of you
6|150|Say, "Present your witnesses! Could anyone testify that it is Allah Who has forbidden (all) this?" Even if they do testify (falsely), don´t you bear witness with them. Do not follow the whims and wishes of those who reject Our revelations _ those who do not believe in the life-to-come, and deem others as being equal to their Lord
6|151|Say, "Come, and let me recite to you what your Lord has enjoined upon you as your sacred duty. Do not associate anything as His partner (and equal). Treat your parents with kindness and courtesy. Do not kill your offspring because of poverty. We shall give you, and them, the provisions (of life). Do not come anywhere close to committing the lewd and lascivious acts _ whether openly or in secret. Do not take a human life _ Allah has deemed the human life to be sacred _ except in the cause and the course of justice. That, He has instructed you! Perhaps, you would understand
6|152|Do not touch the assets of an orphan till he comes of age, except with worthy and venerable intentions. (Be just), fill the measure to its full and weigh accurately. We do not burden anyone beyond his capacity to bear. Be just when you say anything _ (bear witness or pass judgment) _ even if it involves your own kin. Fulfil the pledges you make with Allah (or in His name). That, He has instructed you. Perhaps, you would bear in mind
6|153|That, indeed, is My path _ the (only) straight path; so follow it! Do not follow other ways because they will alienate you from His path. That, He has instructed you! Perhaps you would adopt righteousness
6|154|And We gave Musa the book. It was complete, and contained the detailed explanation of all things for the righteous. It was the guidance and mercy, so they may have faith in the (scheduled) meeting with their Lord
6|155|We have (now) revealed this book, (the Qur´an) as a blessing. Follow it and fear Allah! Perhaps, you would be graced by His mercy
6|156|(It has been revealed to you) lest you would say, "The two groups _ (the Christians and the Jews) _ before our times had received the book while we remained ignorant and unaware of its study and knowledge
6|157|So that you cannot (offer excuses and) say, "Had the book been revealed to us, We would have followed its guidance better than the two earlier groups." The proof from your Lord has now come to you. It is the guidance and mercy! Can anyone be more evil than those who reject and shun Our revelations. Because of their aversion We will soon inflict a treacherous torment upon those who turned away from Our revelations
6|158|Now what are they waiting for? Do they expect the angels to come to them (with their death warrants)? Or for your Lord (Himself) to show up? Or any one of the (final and manifest) signs from your Lord to appear? (Professing) belief on the day any such signs appear will not benefit those who had not believed earlier, nor those who had failed to earn any good deeds with their belief. Say to them, "Go ahead and wait! We too shall wait with you
6|159|Indeed, you have nothing to do with those who cause schisms, and divide their faith into sects. The decision in their case rests with Allah; He will (pass His verdict and) tell them what they used to do
6|160|Whoever earns one good deed, shall receive ten such deeds (to his credit), while whoever commits an evil deed will only be punished equal to a single offense. They shall not be wronged
6|161|Say, "In fact my Lord has guided me to the straight path. It is the true eternal faith, and the religion of the community of Ibraheem who worshipped Allah to the total exclusion of all others. He was not an idolater
6|162|Say, "My ´salat´, and my sacrifice, my life and my death are all for Allah, the Lord of the universe
6|163|He has no partner (or equal). That is what I am ordered! And I am the first to submit and surrender
6|164|Say, "Shall I look for another Lord for you besides Allah, even though He is the Lord of every single thing? Each one is personally responsible for every sin he commits. No one shall bear (or share) the burden (of sin) for anyone else. Towards your Lord is your final destination. At that time, He will inform you about everything you used to dispute
6|165|He it is, Who has appointed you His deputy on this earth. He excelled some of you over others in rank (power and authority), so He may put you through a test with what He has granted you. Indeed, your Lord is very swift (and severe) in inflicting punishment, and of course, He is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
7|1|Alif, Laam Meem, Saad
7|2|(Oh Muhammad, SAW), this book is revealed to you, not to cause you any distress. Rather, with it you may warn (the unbelievers) and remind the believers
7|3|(Tell them), "Follow that which has been revealed to you by your Lord, and do not (accept or) follow any other patron besides Him. Seldom do you bear (that) in mind
7|4|Many towns have We destroyed! Our punishment came upon them at night (when they slept), or while they napped (during the day)
7|5|Then, when Our punishment landed on them, what rang on their lips was nothing but (a confession of guilt); "We really were the wrongdoers
7|6|(On the Day of Judgment) We will definitely call to account (all) those to whom We sent the messengers, and We will surely ask the messengers as well
7|7|Then, We would narrate to them everything with a definite (and specific) knowledge. We were (really) never absent ever
7|8|That day, truth (alone) shall carry weight. Only such ones whose scales (of good deeds) weigh heavier, would be successful
7|9|While the ones whose scales weigh lighter would be the losers. They had squandered themselves, because they used to unjustly (and willfully) deny Our signs (and Our revelations)
7|10|We certainly entrusted you with power (and authority) in the world, and here We provided means for your livelihood. Little do you thank
7|11|We certainly created you, and then gave you (a human) form. Then, We said to the angels, "Prostrate before Adam (in homage)." They all bowed down (to the ground) except Iblees _ (the Shaitan). He was not among those who fell prostrate
7|12|(We) asked, "What kept you away? Why did you not fall prostrate when I commanded you?" (He) said, "I am better than he. You created me from fire while You have created him out of clay
7|13|(We) said, "Come off it! You have no right (or reason) to (fancy and) flaunt your (imagined) eminence. Get out! You are among the disgraced (and banished)
7|14|(Shaitan) said, "Grant me time till the day they are raised (back to life)
7|15|(Allah) said, "You are granted the time
7|16|(Shaitan) said, "(Lord), since You lured and led me astray, I would now lurk in ambush for them on Your straight path, (to drive them astray)
7|17|Then, (to deceive them) I will approach them head on, as well as from their rear, and from their right and the left sides. You will not find most of them grateful
7|18|(Allah) said, "Get out of here! You are despised and banished. I will definitely pack the hell with you all _ you, as well as those among them who follow you
7|19|Oh Adam! You and your wife may live in paradise and eat anything here that you like. But do not come close to this one tree, or else the two of you would become the wrongdoers
7|20|But Shaitan whispered doubts to both of them. He wanted to expose their nakedness to them, which was kept hidden from them. He said (to them), "Your Lord forbade you (the fruit of) this tree, so you would not turn into angels or become immortal
7|21|He swore to the two, saying, "I am really your well-wisher
7|22|With deceit and deception, he brought about their fall. When they tasted the (fruit of that) tree, their nakedness became visible to them. They began to cover their nakedness with the leaves of paradise. Their Lord called out, "Didn´t I forbid you that tree? Didn´t I warn you both that Shaitan is your professed enemy
7|23|Both of them cried out, "Our Lord, we committed a sin against ourselves! Now, if You did not forgive us, and have mercy on us, we would surely be the losers
7|24|(The Lord) said, "Get out of here! Both of you _ (humans and Shaitans) _ are each other´s enemy. For a (specified) time, your abode and your provisions shall be on earth
7|25|Said, "There shall you live, and there shall you die; and from there you shall be raised back to life (on the Day of Judgment)
7|26|Oh children of Adam, We have granted you garments to cover your nakedness, and as means of adornment for you. The best attire is that of piety. This (in itself) is one of the signs of Allah. Perhaps, they would bear (that) in mind
7|27|Oh children of Adam! Do not let Shaitan entice you as he did your (primordial) parents when he got them expelled from paradise. He stripped them of their clothes, in order to expose their nakedness to them. Of course, Shaitan and his tribe watch you from where you cannot see them. Of course, We let the Shaitans be the friends of those who do not believe
7|28|And when they commit an obscene and lewd act, they say, "We found our ancestors doing that, and Allah has enjoined that upon us." Say, "Absolutely not! Allah never (ever) commands anything lewd and obscene. Do you attribute such lies to Allah, about which you know (absolutely) nothing
7|29|Say, "My Lord enjoins justice. In every place of worship, set your faces (and attention) towards Him. Invoke Him with sincerity and devotion, by making faith His exclusive domain. You would return to life just like He created you (the first time)
7|30|One group He has guided. Misguidance became the lot of the other group. (Because), they accepted Shaitans to be their patrons and protectors instead of Allah! And they believe that they are on the right path
7|31|Oh children of Adam! At every place of worship, wear your (best clothes as) adornments. Eat and drink but do not waste. In fact, He does not like those who are wasteful
7|32|Say, "Who forbade adornments, and the wholesome edible things Allah has produced for His servants?" Say, "They are for the believers in the life of this world. On the Day of Judgment, such things shall be theirs exclusively." Thus, We explain Our verses in detail for a nation that knows
7|33|Say, "In fact, my Lord has forbidden all kinds of lewd and obscene acts whether committed openly or in secret: (all sorts of) sins and wrongful oppressions, associating anything (or anyone) with Allah for which He has revealed no sanction, and attributing to Allah that about which you know nothing
7|34|Every nation has been ordained a (fixed) time (to accept or reject the divine truth). Once their time has come, they cannot delay nor advance it by (even as much as) an hour
7|35|Oh children of Adam! Messengers will surely come to you from among your own, and they will relate My revelations to you. Then, those who refrain from evil and mend their ways shall have nothing to fear; nor shall they (ever) grieve (or be sorry)
7|36|And there are those who reject Our revelations, and treat them with disdain and arrogance. Such are the people of the (hell) fire. They shall live there forever
7|37|Could anyone be more evil than the one who invents lies about Allah or rejects His revelations? Such ones would continue to receive their apportioned provisions according to the book of decrees (right until their death). When Our messengers, (the angels of death), come to them to claim their souls, they would ask, "Now, where are all those you used to pray to and worship, instead of Allah?" They would reply, "All of them have all vanished and deserted us." Thus, they would bear witness against themselves, that they were indeed the unbelievers
7|38|Allah will say, "Enter the fire along with the generations of humans and jinn that lived before you. As it enters (the hellfire), each generation will curse the group ahead of it. Finally, when they are all together in the fire, each succeeding generation will say about the one preceding it, "Our Lord, these are the ones who led us astray. Give them twice the torment by the (hell) fire." (Allah) will say, "There is twice the torment for each one of you, but you (just) do not realize
7|39|Each preceding generation will say to the one following it, "You do not have an advantage over us. Now taste the torment in return for what you have wrought
7|40|Indeed, the gates of heaven shall not open for those who reject Our revelations, and treat them with disdain. A camel may pass through the eye of a needle, but they shall never enter paradise. This is how We punish the criminals
7|41|Hellfire shall be the bed under them; and hellfire shall be their blanket to cover them. This is how We punish the evildoers
7|42|While those who believe and do the righteous deeds _ and We do not impose upon a soul beyond its capacity to bear _ are the people of paradise. There, they shall live forever
7|43|We will strip away whatever rancor remains in their heart. Rivers shall flow under their feet. They will say, "All praise is for Allah Who guided us towards this. Never could we have found the right path, had Allah not guided us. The messengers of our Lord had brought us the truth." A voice will call out to them, "You have inherited this paradise as a reward for what you used to do
7|44|The people of paradise will call out to the inmates of hell, "We found to be true (all) the promises our Lord made to us. Did you (also) find everything your Lord promised to you to be true?" They would reply, "Yes!" Whereupon, an announcer in their midst will proclaim, "The curse of Allah is upon the evildoers
7|45|(Cursed are) those who prevent people from the path of Allah and seek to make it crooked. They do not believe in the afterlife
7|46|A barrier shall exist between the two groups _ (those in paradise and those in hell). At a height would be (a third group of) men who would long to enter paradise, but would not have entered it yet. They would recognize all by their distinctive features. To the people of paradise they would say, "Peace upon you
7|47|When their sight turns to the inmates of hellfire, they would say, "Our Lord, do not include us with the wicked people
7|48|The people at the height would recognize men (in the hellfire) by their distinctive features and would say to them, "Did all your followers and your hoarded wealth _ of which you were so proud (and used to boast) _ help you in the least
7|49|Hadn´t you sworn about these very people that Allah would grant them nothing of His Mercy?" (But now they are told), "Enter the paradise! You shall have no fear, nor shall you ever grieve (or be sorry)
7|50|The inmates of hell will call out to the people of paradise, saying, "Pour us some water, or some of the provisions Allah has granted you." The people of paradise would reply, "Allah has of course denied these things to those who denied the truth
7|51|(They are) those who took their faith as mere play and pastime. The life of this world deceived them." (Allah says), "So, today We shall ignore them just like they forgot the meeting of this day. (This is) because they used to reject Our revelations
7|52|We have certainly given them the book, which explains matters with certainty. It is the guidance and the blessing for the nation that believes
7|53|What they now await is just the fulfillment (of the events foretold). On the day the events unfold, those who had ignored it earlier would acknowledge it saying, "The messengers of our Lord had brought us the truth. Now, do we have anyone to intercede on our behalf? Or could we be sent back to our former existence, so we may earn deeds different from what we had?" They incurred a heavy loss on themselves and the lies they had invented, did not help
7|54|Your Lord, Allah, is certainly the One Who created the heavens and the earth in six periods of time. Then He mounted the throne (majestically). He wrapped the night over the day that follows it quickly. The sun, the moon and the stars have all been tamed by His command. Beware! The creation and the command (over it), belong to Him (exclusively). Exalted is He, the Sustainer of all the worlds
7|55|Call and implore your Lord with humility, and in solitude. He does not like those who are the aggressors
7|56|Do not spread chaos in the land after order has been established in it (firmly and fairly). Implore Him with fear and hope. Of course, the mercy of Allah is never too far from the righteous
7|57|He it is, Who sends winds bearing the glad tidings of His approaching mercy. We direct the wind heavy with rainclouds towards the dead and barren land, and We call water to pour down upon it. We bring out (from that land) all sorts of food with that water. In much the same manner, We will bring the dead back to life. Perhaps, you would bear that in mind
7|58|By the will of Allah, the good and fertile land grows crops and plants with ease. But the bad and barren land barely grows anything. This is how We display Our signs repeatedly for a grateful nation
7|59|Indeed, We sent Nooh to his people. He said, "Oh my people, worship Allah exclusively. You do not have any god besides Him. For you, I really fear the torment of a terrible day
7|60|The elders among his people said, "We really think you have blundered and have obviously gone astray
7|61|Nooh replied, "Oh my people, there is nothing wrong with me. Rather, I am the messenger of the Lord of the universe
7|62|I convey to you the messages of my Lord, and I give you sincere advice. I know from Allah that, about which you know nothing
7|63|Are you surprised that a reminder from your Lord came through a man among you? So he may warn you, and so you may fear Allah and receive His mercy
7|64|But they called him a liar. So, aboard an ark, We rescued him as well as those who had believed in him, and We drowned (all) those who rejected His signs. Indeed, they were a blind people
7|65|And to (the people of) ´Aads´ (We sent) their brother ´Hood´. (He) said, "Oh my people, worship Allah! You do not have any god besides Him. Do you, then, not fear (Him)
7|66|The elders among his nation who had disbelieved said, "We really think you are being stupid. In fact, we believe that you are a liar
7|67|He said, "Oh my people, I am not stupid. Rather, I am the messenger of the Lord of the universe
7|68|I convey to you the messages of my Lord, and I am your trustworthy well-wisher
7|69|Are you surprised that a reminder from your Lord came through a man among you, so he may warn you? Do not forget! After the nation of ´Aad´, He appointed you its successors, and He enhanced you greatly in power and stature. Keep in mind the blessings bestowed upon you by Allah, so that you would prosper
7|70|They said, "Did you come to us so we may worship Allah exclusively, and abandon those our forefathers used to worship? If you are truthful, bring upon us that with which you have threatened us
7|71|(Hood) said, "The wrath and the curse of your Lord are already upon you. Do you argue with me concerning (just) some names that you and your forefathers have conjured up. Allah has not revealed any authority for them. So wait on, I too shall wait along with you
7|72|So, by Our Grace, We rescued him as well as all those with him, and We completely weeded out all those who denied Our revelations, and did not believe
7|73|And (We sent) their brother Saleh, to (the people of) Samood. He said, "Oh my people, worship Allah! You have no god besides Him. A clear proof has surely come to you from your Lord. This camel of Allah is a sign for you. So, leave it alone and let it graze freely in Allah´s land. Do not touch it with evil (intentions), else a painful punishment will land on you
7|74|Do not forget! After the (people of) ´Aads´, He appointed you their successors, and established you firmly in the land. You occupy castles in the plain, and carve out (secure) homes (for yourself) in the mountains. Keep in mind the blessings bestowed upon you by Allah, and do not spread corruption and chaos in the land like mischief mongers
7|75|The leaders of his nation who were arrogant and scornful, said to the believers among the down trodden and the despised, "Do you know for sure that Saleh is the messenger of Allah?" They replied, "We do believe in the message revealed to him
7|76|Those who were arrogant said, "We of course reject what you have believed
7|77|Then, they slaughtered the camel and flaunted the command of their Lord. They said, "Oh Saleh, if you really are the messenger, then bring upon us the punishment with which you have been threatening us
7|78|Consequently, an earthquake seized them. The next morning found them lifeless in their homes, lying face down (in dirt)
7|79|So, (Saleh) turned away from them and said, "Oh my people! I certainly conveyed to you the message of my Lord, and I advised you sincerely. But (evidently) you did not like your sincere well-wishers
7|80|(And We sent) Loot! He said to his nation, "Do you indulge in acts so lewd and shameful that no one in the entire world had ever committed them previously
7|81|You gratify your sexual desires by approaching men instead of women! You are a wanton people; (you have gone) far beyond all limits (of decency)
7|82|His nation had no answer except to say, "Banish them from your town. Indeed, they profess to be sacred and pure
7|83|So We rescued him and his family, except his wife. She was among those who stayed behind
7|84|And We showered them with a (treacherous) rain (consisting of stones made of baked clay). Observe how (severe) was the outcome for the criminals
7|85|And towards (the people of) Midian (We sent) their brother, Shoaib. He said, "Oh my people, worship Allah! You do not have any god besides Him. A clear guidance has come to you from your Lord. So, (when selling) give the full measure and weight, and do not defraud and deprive people of their rightful things. Do not spread confusion and chaos, after order has been established in the land. This is for your own good, if you only believe
7|86|And do not lie in ambush for the believers on every road threatening them and preventing them from the path of Allah; and do not seek to distort the truth. Remember the time when you were fewer, and He increased you greatly in number." Observe how (severe) was the outcome for the mischief mongers
7|87|If a group among you believes in the message I was sent with while another group refuses to believe, then (just wait) till Allah judges between them. Indeed, Allah is absolutely the very Best of the judges
7|88|The arrogant (and conceited) leaders of his nation said, "Oh Shoaib! We would certainly banish you from our town, as well as those who believe in you. Else, you must return to our religion. " He said, "What? Even if we hate it
7|89|If we returned to your religion, we would have invented a lie against Allah, particularly since He it is, Who saved us from it. By no means will we return to your religion, unless of course Allah, our Lord wills it so. Our Lord has full knowledge of every single thing. We do place our trust in Allah. Our Lord! Give Your just verdict (in the matter) between our nation and us. You are the Best of the judges
7|90|The unbelieving leaders of his nation said, "If you follow Shoaib, you would certainly be the losers
7|91|Consequently, an earthquake seized them. The next morning found them lifeless in their homes, face down (in the dirt)
7|92|Those who rejected Shoaib were (wiped out) as though they had never lived there at all. In fact, those who rejected Shoaib were actually the losers
7|93|Shoaib turned away from them and said, "Oh my people, I certainly conveyed to you the messages of my Lord, and I advised you sincerely. But how can I feel sorry for a nation that refuses to believe
7|94|Whenever We sent a prophet into any town, We inflicted its residents with suffering and hardship. Perhaps they would adopt humility (and be unpretentious)
7|95|Then We changed their fortune from bad to good, till they grew affluent. They (forgot Our favors and) said, "Even our forefathers had gone through (the cycle of) suffering and prosperity!" Thereupon, We took them to task suddenly, and they did not realize
7|96|Had the people of the town believed and adopted piety, We would have arranged for Our blessings to rain down upon them from the sky, and blessings springing from the earth. But they rejected and so We grabbed them because of what they used to do
7|97|Did the people of the town feel so secure that Our wrath would not land on them at night while they slept unawares
7|98|Or did the people of the town feel so secure that Our wrath would not land on them in broad daylight while they were engaged in their pastimes
7|99|Did they not feel afraid of Allah´s secret plan? Only the people who are doomed to be the losers feel secure against Allah´s secret plan
7|100|Is it still not apparent to those who inherited the earth from the previous generations, that if We pleased We could punish them too for their sins. We could stamp a seal on their hearts, so they could hear nothing
7|101|We narrate to you the stories of these towns. Their messengers certainly brought them the clear proofs. But they (just) would not believe the message they had already rejected earlier. Thus, Allah stamps a seal on the hearts of the unbelievers
7|102|In most of them, We did not find (any commitment to) the covenant. We found most of them to be the defiant evildoers
7|103|Then, after them We raised Musa and sent him with Our signs to the pharaoh and his chiefs. But they were unjust, and rejected the signs. So observe how (severe) was the outcome for the evildoers
7|104|Musa said, "Oh pharaoh! I am certainly the messenger from the Lord of the universe
7|105|It is not befitting for me to say anything concerning Allah except the truth. I have brought you the clear proofs from my Lord. So let the children of Israel accompany me
7|106|The pharaoh said, "If you are telling the truth, and if you have really brought the sign, then present it
7|107|So, Musa threw down his staff and suddenly it became a real live serpent
7|108|He pulled out his hand (from his pocket) and it appeared dazzling white to the viewers
7|109|The chiefs of the nation of pharaoh said, "Of course he is an expert magician
7|110|He wants to drive you out of your land. Now, what do you suggest
7|111|They advised the pharaoh, "Hold him and his brother for a while and send announcers in all the towns
7|112|They will summon all the expert magicians in your presence
7|113|The magicians came to the pharaoh and said, "There would surely be a (handsome) reward for us if we triumph, wouldn´t there
7|114|The pharaoh said, "Of course, and you would also be close to me as my courtiers
7|115|They said, "Oh Musa! Either you cast your spell, or let us be the ones to go (first)
7|116|Musa said, "You go (first)." As they cast their spells, they bewitched people´s eyes and struck them with awe. They conjured up an awesome magic
7|117|We inspired Musa, "Throw your staff!" and immediately it swallowed up their conjured up illusions
7|118|Thus, the truth was vindicated. Everything they had done came to no avail
7|119|The magicians were defeated there and then. They were utterly disgraced
7|120|The magicians threw themselves on the ground prostrate
7|121|They said, "We believe in the Lord of the universe
7|122|The Lord of Musa and Haroon
7|123|The pharaoh said, "You dared to believe in him before I gave you the permission? Indeed, it is a trick. You (all) have hatched a (nefarious) plot to takeover the town and drive out its rightful residents. Soon you will come to know
7|124|I will definitely have your hands and feet cut off on alternate sides; and then, I will have you all crucified
7|125|They said, "We are certainly going to return to our Lord
7|126|Do you wreak vengeance on us simply because we have believed our Lord´s signs when they reached us? Our Lord! Grant us fortitude and keep us steadfast. Give us death as Your obedient ones _ (lit: muslims)
7|127|The chief of the pharaoh´s nation said (to the pharaoh), "Will you allow Musa and his nation to spread disorder in the land and abandon you and your gods?" He said, "We will slaughter their sons and spare their women. We certainly have an absolute stranglehold over them
7|128|Musa said to his nation, "Implore Allah for assistance, and have patience! In fact, the land belongs to Allah and He gives it as a trust to whom He pleases among His servants. However, the final outcome _ (the hereafter) _ is (exclusively) for the righteous
7|129|Musa´s nation said, "We were being tortured and persecuted before you were sent to us, and even since you have been with us." Musa said, "Perhaps your Lord will (completely) wipe out your enemy, and appoint you the successors in the land. Then, He will observe how you conduct yourselves
7|130|And We had certainly punished the pharaoh´s people with drought, and the dearth of food and fruit. Perhaps they would heed
7|131|When the good times arrived, they said, "We deserve this!" But when misfortune struck, they associated an evil omen with Musa and his companions, and blamed them for the hard times. Their evil omen exists with Allah! But most of them do not realize
7|132|They said, "We are never going to believe you no matter what signs you bring us, to try to bewitch us
7|133|Thereupon We let loose upon them the punishment of the flood, the locusts, the lice, the frogs and the blood _ (a succession of) elaborately manifest proofs. But they continued to display arrogance. They were a criminal nation
7|134|Whenever a scourge landed on them they would say, "Oh Musa, implore your Lord on our behalf because of what He has promised you. We would certainly believe you if you rid us of this torment, and we will certainly let the children of Israel go with you
7|135|But as We eased away the torment for awhile to let them redeem themselves, they always failed to keep their promise
7|136|So, because they had rejected Our signs, and were unmindful of them, We exacted a revenge from them and drowned them in the sea
7|137|We caused the nation that was considered weak and oppressed to inherit the eastern and the western parts of the land We had blessed. Then, the good word of your Lord (concerning prosperity) for the children of Israel was fulfilled. We totally demolished everything the pharaoh and his nation had contrived, every structure they ever raised
7|138|We brought the children of Israel across the sea to safety. There, they came across a nation devoted to the worship of its idols. The children of Israel said, "Oh Musa, let us have our god like the gods they have!" Musa said, "You really are a foolish ignorant people
7|139|Of course, these people are doomed to be destroyed, and everything they have ever done shall come to naught
7|140|He (further) said, "Shall I seek other gods for you besides Allah? Although it is He, Who has favored you and preferred you over the entire world
7|141|(And Allah says) "Bear in mind that We delivered you from (the clutches of) the pharaoh´s nation. They persecuted you with a dreadful torture; they slaughtered your sons and spared your women! In that was a gruesome test from your Lord, the Greatest
7|142|We summoned Musa (to Mount Sinai) and ordained for him a term of thirty nights, and then extended it by another ten. Musa completed the term of forty nights ordained by his Lord. (But, before leaving) he said to his brother Haroon, "Be my representative for my nation, maintain order and do not follow the ways of those who spread disorder
7|143|When Musa arrived at Our chosen place at the appointed hour, his Lord spoke to him. Musa said, "My Lord, let me see you. I want to look at you." (Allah) said, "You will not be able to see Me. Watch that mountain! If it can withstand (My apparition) and stay firm in its place, then perhaps you can see Me. When the Lord revealed Himself to the mountain, it collapsed and crumbled into fine dust, and Musa was knocked down unconscious. He said, when he recovered, "Exalted are You! I turn to You in repentance and I am the first to believe
7|144|(Allah) said, "I have selected you over all other people to grant you My message and an audience with Me. So accept what I have granted you, and be grateful
7|145|Then, We inscribed on the tablets for him the guidance relating to all matters and (detailed) instructions about every aspect (of life). "Hold onto it with all your strength and enjoin your nation to carry out these excellent (instructions). I will soon show you the abode of the evildoers
7|146|I shall divert and drive away from My signs those who _ without any reason or right _ behave in a haughty and arrogant manner in this world. They will not believe though they may witness every single sign (and proof). When they see the road to righteousness, they fail to follow it, but when they see a way that is decadent or deviant, they adopt it as their own way (right away). This is because they rejected Our signs and were unmindful of them
7|147|The deeds of those who rejected Our signs and the meeting (with their Lord) on the Day of Judgment would come to nothing. Would they encounter the consequences of anything other than what they do
7|148|In his absence, the nation of Musa molded their jewelry in the effigy of a calf that made a mooing sound. Did they not see that it neither talked to them, nor showed them the way? Yet, they accepted it for worship; they were the evil doers
7|149|When the matter got out of hand and they realized that they had indeed gone astray, they said, "We would surely be the losers if our Lord does not have mercy on us, and does not forgive us
7|150|Musa was angry and sad when he returned to his nation. He said, "How (awful and) evil was what you did behind my back! Did you rush towards your Lord´s Judgment?" He dropped the (inscribed) tablets and grabbed his brother by the lock of hair on his head and pulled him closer. His brother said, "Oh son of my mother! In fact, the nation considered me weak and vulnerable. They (overwhelmed me and) almost killed me. Do not give the enemy a chance to gloat over my fate. Do not count me among the evildoing folk
7|151|Musa prayed, "My Lord, forgive me and my brother and admit us into Your Grace. You are absolutely the most Merciful of those who show mercy
7|152|The wrath of their Lord, and a disgrace in the life of this world would soon land upon those who chose (to worship) the calf. This is how We punish those who invent falsehood
7|153|Those who commit evil deeds but repent afterward (would find that) even then your Lord is the most Forgiving, the most Merciful
7|154|As Musa´s wrath subsided, he picked up the tablets. Their inscriptions contained guidance and mercy for those who fear their Lord
7|155|Musa selected seventy men for an appointment with Us. There, a violent earthquake seized them. He prayed, "Oh my Lord, had You so willed You could have destroyed them _ and me _ earlier. Would You destroy us because of the actions of a few foolish ones amongst us. This was only a trial from You. By that, You lead astray whom You want, and You guide whom You want. You (alone) are our patron! Forgive us, and have mercy on us. You are the very Best of all those who forgive
7|156|And ordain for us whatever is good in the life of this world, as well as the life-to-come. We have really turned to You in repentance." (Allah) said, "I strike down with My punishment anyone I will. But My mercy extends over all things. I will ordain My mercy for those who are pious and pay their ´zakat´, and those who believe in Our (revelations and) signs
7|157|(My mercy is for) those who follow the messenger, the prophet who can neither read nor write. They will find him mentioned in their scriptures, the Torah and the gospels. He orders them to do the right thing, and to avoid the wrong. He makes the pure and the wholesome lawful for them, and he forbids them the foul and the filthy. He relieves them of the burdens and the shackles with which they were bogged down. Successful indeed, are those who believe in him, honor and help him, and follow the light (the Qur´an) that was revealed to him
7|158|(Oh Muhammad, SAW), say, "Oh mankind! I am certainly the messenger of Allah towards you all _ (the entire world). To Him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. There is no god but He. It is He Who gives life. And He gives death! So believe in Allah and His messenger, the prophet who can neither read nor write, and who believes in Allah and His words (the commandments). Follow him, so that you may receive guidance
7|159|Among the people of Musa there were some who guided others truthfully and established justice
7|160|We split them into twelve distinct clans. When his people asked for water We inspired Musa, "Strike that rock with your staff!" As a result, twelve springs gushed forth from it, and each tribe then knew the place of its water. We provided the cover of clouds for them (in the desert), and We sent forth for them (from the sky) _ ´the manna´ and ´the salwa´. (We said), "Eat the pure wholesome things We give you." They did not harm Us a bit; rather, (by being ungrateful) they used to inflict harm upon themselves
7|161|(Remember) when they were told, "Live in this town, and eat here whatever your hearts desire. But (you must) say ´forgive our sins´ and enter the gate (of the town) prostrate, and crawling on all four. We will forgive your sins and We will increase the reward of the righteous
7|162|But the evildoers among them changed the words (of the prayers) to something other than what was prescribed to them. Thus, We lobbed a torment upon them from the sky, because of the wrongs they had wrought
7|163|Ask them about the town by the seaside that transgressed in the matter of the Sabbath. The fish was plentiful in the sea on the day of the Sabbath, but on days other than the Sabbath, there was hardly any fish. Thus We put them through a trial, because they used to commit sinful acts
7|164|And then a group among them said, "Why must you preach to these people when Allah is going to destroy them (anyway), or punish them with a severe torment?" (The righteous ones replied), "You must, in order to escape blame from your Lord. It is possible that they may (heed and) fear (Allah)
7|165|They (ignored) and forgot what they had been reminded of. So We rescued the ones who forbade evil, while We inflicted a grievous punishment upon those who committed evil. They used to disobey (Allah)
7|166|Finally, when they exceeded (the bounds, and violated all) the prohibitions, We said to them, "Become monkeys _ despised and rejected
7|167|Then your Lord declared that till the Day of Judgment, He would certainly continue to raise people who would persecute and torture them _ (the Jews) _ in the worst possible way. Your Lord is swift in retribution! He is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
7|168|We scattered and spread them across the earth as separate groups. Some of them were righteous, while others were quite the opposite. We put them through the test, both (by showering them) with Our blessings, and (by inflicting them with) calamities. Perhaps, they would turn to Us
7|169|Then, the unworthy and evil generation succeeded them and inherited the scriptures. They chose the benefits of this lowly temporal world and said, "We would be forgiven all our sins." Yet, whenever the (chance to attain the) worldly gains of a similar kind came by, they grabbed it again. Hadn´t they made a covenant by the scriptures that they would not say anything about Allah except the truth? And they have studied the scriptures! The abode of the life-to-come is better for those who are righteous. Then, do you not understand
7|170|Those who hold on to the scriptures firmly, and establish the ´salat´ (should know that) We certainly do not waste the reward of those who do the right thing
7|171|(Remember the time) when We shook the mountain that hung over them like a canopy? They thought that it was going to come down upon them. (We said), "Hold on to what We have given you with all your strength and resolve. Remember what it prescribes. Perhaps, you will fear (Allah)
7|172|(Remember) when your Lord brought forth all the offspring-to-be from the loin of Adam, and had them bear witness for themselves. (Allah asked), "Am I not your Lord?" They replied, "Of course, and we do bear witness to that!" (We did that) lest you should say on the Day of Judgment (as an excuse) that you were unaware of this
7|173|Or lest you should say, "It was in fact our forefathers who started (practicing) ´shirk´ _ (accepted others as Allah´s partners). We were mainly the descendants who came much later. Will you then punish us for the deeds of the wrongdoers
7|174|Thus We explain Our (signs and) revelations in detail. Perhaps, they may turn (to Us)
7|175|Narrate to them the story of the one to whom We awarded the knowledge of Our revelations. But he cast it aside! So, Shaitan pursued him until he became one of the misguided ones
7|176|With that knowledge We could have raised him to new heights, had We so wished. But he clung to the ground and yielded to his whims and wishes. His example is that of a dog! Whether you shoo him away or leave him alone, a dog will (always) stick out his tongue and pant. Such is the example of a nation that rejects Our (signs and) revelations. Keep narrating these tales, perhaps they will ponder
7|177|Despicable is the parable of the people who reject Our revelations, and thereby wrong themselves
7|178|Rightly guided is the one whom Allah guides. While those whom Allah misleads are in fact the real losers
7|179|In fact, We have doomed to hell many of the jinn and the humans. They have a brain, but with it they fail to think. They have eyes but they do not use them to see (the truth). They have ears but they fail to hear (the truth) with them. They are (just) like cattle; in fact they are worse. Such are the heedless ones
7|180|Allah´s are the most beautiful names (and attributes). Invoke Him by those names, and part company with those who deny (or mock) His names (and attributes). They will soon be punished for what they are doing
7|181|Among those We have created, there is (always) a group that guides (others) towards the truth and establishes justice
7|182|Step by step, by means they do not understand, We would ruin all those who reject Our revelations
7|183|I am giving them some respite _ (a little more time). My plan is indeed infallible
7|184|Do they not ponder? Their companion, (Muhammad, SAW) does not have an affliction. Rather, he is (truly and) clearly a warner
7|185|Don´t they ever look at the cosmos _ the heavens and the earth and everything else Allah has created? (Have they considered that) maybe their allotted time (in this life) has almost come to an end. Then, which message can they believe in, after that
7|186|There can be no guide for the one whom Allah leads astray. He leaves them wandering blindly in their unruly rebellious arrogance
7|187|They ask you about the hour (of Judgment), "When will it occur?" Say, "In fact, the knowledge of that rests with my Lord. No one but He can disclose its time. It is an event of utmost gravity in the heavens and the earth. It will creep up on you suddenly." They ask you as if you are well aware of its time (of occurrence). Say, "Allah (alone) knows the time of its occurrence." But most people (just) do not know
7|188|Say, "I possess no power to gain any benefit for myself, nor to evade any harm; except whatever Allah wants. If I had any knowledge of the unseen future I could have amassed an abundance of wealth, and no misfortune would have ever touched me. I am only a warner, and a bearer of good news for the believing nation
7|189|He it is Who created you (all) from a single being, then out of that (one being) created its mate. So that man may live with her in peace (and love). When man embraces her, she conceives a tiny fetus which she hardly notices. Later, when she becomes heavy (and begins to show) both parents pray to Allah, their Lord, "If You grant us a healthy (child) we shall be grateful
7|190|When He grants them a healthy (child), both begin to attribute it to the partners they have ascribed. Exalted is Allah, far above what they associate with Him
7|191|Do they assign those who create nothing as the partners of Allah? Rather, they are themselves the created beings
7|192|Such partners cannot offer them any support. In fact, they cannot even help themselves
7|193|If you invite them towards guidance, they will not follow. It is all the same to them whether you call out to them or stay silent
7|194|The others you invoke besides Allah, are merely human beings like yourself. Call them! If you are truthful they should answer you back
7|195|Do they have feet they could walk with? Or do they have hands they could hold with? Do they have eyes to see, or ears to hear? Say, "Summon (those you have installed as) your partners, then plot and do your worst against me. Do not give me a respite
7|196|Indeed, my protector is Allah Who has revealed the book, and Who aids the pious
7|197|While those you invoke instead of Him have no power to help you! Nor can they help themselves
7|198|If you invite them towards the guidance, they will not hear. You think they are looking at you, but they do not see a thing
7|199|Be tolerant, and enjoin the right conduct. Turn away from the inane and ignorant ones
7|200|If Shaitan ever incites you to anger, then seek refuge with Allah. Indeed, He hears all, and knows all
7|201|Indeed, whenever an evil thought from Shaitan troubles them, the pious (always) remember (Allah). Then, they begin to see clearly
7|202|While Shaitans plunge their (evil doing) brothers deeper into deception and disobedience. Then they do not relent
7|203|When you do not bring them a miracle (of their liking) they say, "Why do you not bring us the miracle (we demand)?" Tell them, "In fact, I only follow what has been revealed to me by my Lord. This (Qur´an) is the proof from your Lord; it is the guidance and mercy for the nation that believes
7|204|Hush up, and listen attentively when the Qur´an is being recited. Perhaps, you would receive mercy
7|205|Each morning and evening, remember your Lord in your heart with humility and fear, and without raising your voice. Do not (ever) be among the neglectful and the unmindful
7|206|Those close to your Lord _ (the angels) _ are never too proud to worship Him. They chant His praises and fall prostrate before Him
8|1|They ask you about the booties (of battle). Say, "The booties belong to Allah and the messenger. So fear Allah and patch up (all) matters (of differences) among you. Obey Allah and His messenger, if you are the believers
8|2|In fact, the (true) believers are those, whose hearts experience the fear (and cringe) at the (mere) mention of Allah. When the verses are read to them, their belief (surges and) grows. They place their trust in their Lord (exclusively)
8|3|Those who establish ´salat´ and spend (in Our cause) out of what We grant them
8|4|Such are the true (and sincere) believers. With their Lord, they have a high rank, forgiveness and a generous sustenance
8|5|A group of believers did not like it when your Lord made you leave your home for the right cause
8|6|They wrangled with you about the truth even after it became (amply) evident. (They acted) as if they were being driven to their death while they looked on (helplessly)
8|7|(Remember) when Allah promised you, that one of the two groups (of enemy) shall be yours. You preferred the group that was not too heavily armed. But Allah wanted the truth to triumph by His words; (He wanted) to strike forcefully at, (and cut off), the very roots of the unbelievers
8|8|So He may cause the truth to triumph, and so He may rout (and thwart) the untruth (and the absurd) _ much to the dislike of the criminals
8|9|(Remember) when you implored your Lord for help. He responded to your call and said, "I will surely send a thousand angels (following each other) in succession
8|10|Allah has given you this news, to soothe and satisfy your heart. Victory comes only from Allah. Indeed, Allah is the most Powerful and the Wisest
8|11|(Remember) when He caused (a comforting) sleep to come over you in order to give you peace and serenity. He caused water to rain down from the sky to cleanse and purify you, and He rid you of the blight of Shaitan in order to strengthen your heart, and to plant your feet firmly
8|12|(Remember) when your Lord inspired the angels, "I am certainly with you. Keep them steadfast. I´m going to cast terror in the hearts of the unbelievers. So strike their necks and smite all their fingers and toes
8|13|This is because they defied and opposed Allah and His messenger. Whoever defies and opposes Allah and His messenger (should know that) Allah is certainly very (swift and) severe in inflicting punishment
8|14|This (punishment) is for you (unbelievers). So now taste it! Of course, there is (also) the punishment of the hellfire for the unbelievers
8|15|Oh you who believe, when you meet the unbelievers (on the battlefield), do not ever turn your backs to them (and retreat)
8|16|On that day, whoever (retreats and) turns his back _ except as a battle strategy, or to join another of his group _ incurs the wrath of Allah. Hell shall be his abode; and it is the worst destination
8|17|You did not slay them. Rather, it was Allah Who killed them. You did not throw (sand at the enemy) when you threw (a handful). Rather, it was Allah Who threw (the sand). So that He may test the believers by a fair test from Him. Allah is the all-Hearing, and the all-Knowing
8|18|This (is the fact). Surely Allah (blunts and) weakens the deceitful schemes of the unbelievers
8|19|(Oh unbelievers)! You sought a decision and a decision has now been handed down to you. It is better for you to desist. But if you repeat (your offense), We too shall restore (the punishment), and your gang no matter how large, will not be able to help you a bit. Allah is certainly with the believers
8|20|Oh you who believe! Obey Allah and His messenger, and do not turn away and disregard after you hear the message
8|21|Do not be like those who say, "We heard" even though they do not listen
8|22|Indeed, the worst of the beasts, in the sight of Allah, are the deaf and dumb who do not think
8|23|Had Allah known of any good within them, He would have made them hear. But, if He were to make them hear, they would (just) have turned away stubbornly
8|24|Oh you who believe! Respond to Allah and the messenger; he calls you towards that which gives you life. Be aware that Allah intervenes between a man and his heart, and He is the One towards Whom you shall all be gathered
8|25|Fear the affliction _ (a temptation and a trial) _ which will not strike only just the evil doers among you. Be aware that Allah is certainly very (swift and) severe in (inflicting) punishment
8|26|Remember, when you were fewer in number and considered weak and powerless in the world. You were afraid that people might (rout you and) sweep you away. But He provided you a safe haven. With His support, He strengthened you and gave you pure and wholesome provisions. Perhaps, you would be grateful
8|27|Oh you who believe! Do not betray Allah and His messenger, and do not deliberately betray the trust reposed in you
8|28|Be aware that in fact your wealth and your children are (just) a trial (and a temptation). Allah has a much greater reward for you
8|29|Oh you who believe! If you fear Allah (and do your duty), He will bestow upon you the criterion _ (the ability to sift the right from wrong), rid you of your faults (and flaws), and also grant you forgiveness. Allah is the Lord of great honor
8|30|(Oh Muhammad, SAW, remember) how the unbelievers were plotting to capture you, get you killed or drive you out (of your home). They planned their tricks, while Allah (too) devised His schemes. Allah is absolutely the very Best of the planners
8|31|When Our verses are read to them, they say, "Yes, we have heard that! We too can say things like that, if we want. These are nothing more than tales of people gone by
8|32|Remember when they said, "Oh Allah, if this (Qur´an) happens to be the truth revealed by You, then rain down upon us stones from the sky, or bring on the painful punishment upon us
8|33|Allah would not punish them (Oh Muhammad, SAW) while you were among them. Allah is not going to punish them while they seek forgiveness
8|34|Now, why should Allah not punish them? Now, they are preventing (people) from (coming to) the sacred mosque. They are not its (rightful) guardians and caretakers. Its guardians can only be the righteous ones. But most of them just do not know
8|35|Their worship at the (holy) House (of Allah) consists of nothing more than whistling and hand clapping. Now, taste the punishment you used to deny
8|36|In fact, those who have denied (the truth) spend their wealth in order to turn people away from the path of Allah, and they will continue to do so. Later, it would become a source of anguish and regret for them. Then, they shall be overcome. (All) those who have disbelieved shall (then) be gathered towards the hell
8|37|So that Allah may sift the wicked from the pious. He will put the wicked one atop another, heap them all up, and drop them into hell. Such ones are (really) the losers
8|38|Tell (all) those who have disbelieved, that (even now) if they give up (their skepticism), He will forgive their past deeds. However, if they persist then (remember): a precedent (for punishing the unbelievers) has existed since the earliest generation
8|39|(Oh believers)! Fight against them until the mischief and oppression are no more, and faith becomes the domain of Allah exclusively. If they cease, then (remember): Allah watches (vigilantly) over everything they do
8|40|If they refuse, know it that Allah is your Patron. An excellent Patron is He; and an excellent Protector
8|41|Know it, that a fifth of everything you acquire as the booty (in battle) belongs to Allah, the messenger and his relatives, the orphans, the needy, and the wayfarers. (Accept this) if you believe in Allah and that which We have revealed to Our servant on the day of decision _ the day the two armies met (in the battle of Badar). Allah is capable of doing everything
8|42|(That day) you were (camped) on the near side of the valley, while they were (camped) on the farther side. Their caravan was on a lower ground than yours. If you had made a prior appointment to meet each other there in battle, you would surely have failed to keep it. (But it happened as it did), so that Allah may bring to pass events that simply had to happen. So that those who perish, might perish with a clear proof; and those who live might live on with a clear proof. Allah is certainly the all-Hearing and the all-Knowing
8|43|In your dream, Allah had you see the enemy as fewer in number. You would have lost courage and disputed about the matter, had He showed many more of them to you (in your dream). But Allah saved you. Indeed, He knows (even) that which lies (buried) in the chest
8|44|When you met each other (on the battlefield), He made them appear to you fewer in number. Further, He made you appear fewer in their eyes too; so that He may bring to pass that which had to happen. All matters are referred to Allah (for decision)
8|45|Oh you who believe! When you encounter the enemy (on the battlefield) remain steadfast and remember Allah a lot. So that you may meet with success
8|46|Obey Allah and His messenger and do not dispute, lest you lose courage and your strength wanes. Persevere patiently. Indeed Allah is with those who are patient
8|47|Do not be like those who leave their homes (for battle) with a great pomp and conceit, and a desire to show off. They block (people) from the path of Allah. Everything they do is within Allah´s knowledge and domain
8|48|Shaitan made their deeds appear adorable to them and said, "Today nobody can defeat and overcome you, for I am with you." But when the two armies came close enough to see each other, he took to his heels (saying), "I have nothing to do with you. I see what you do not see. I am (really) afraid of Allah." Of course, Allah is (very swift and) severe in (inflicting) punishment
8|49|(Remember), the hypocrites and others with disease (of disbelief) in their hearts said (about the believers), "Their faith has misled and blinded these people." But whoever places his trust in Allah (knows that) Allah is indeed the most Powerful, and the Wisest
8|50|If only you could see the angels taking full possession (of the souls) of the unbelievers (at the time of their death)! They strike their faces and their backs and say, "Here, taste the punishment of the blazing fire
8|51|This is the result of what your own hands have wrought." Of course Allah is not unjust to His servants
8|52|Their case is just like the nation of the pharaoh and others before them. They refused to believe the signs of Allah. Therefore, Allah took them to task for their sins. Indeed, Allah is very strong and severe in (inflicting) punishment
8|53|This is because Allah never revokes the blessings He bestows upon a people unless they change their inner selves _ (their attitudes and actions). Surely, Allah hears all, and knows all
8|54|(It is) like the example of the followers of the pharaoh, and those before them. They rejected the signs (and the revelations) of their Lord. So We destroyed them for their sins, and We drowned the followers of the pharaoh. All of them were evildoers
8|55|Indeed, the worst of the creatures according to Allah are those who reject (the truth). Then, they would never believe
8|56|(Particularly) those with whom you entered into a pact, and who broke their pledges each and every time. They do not fear (the punishment of Allah)
8|57|Therefore, if you overcome them on the battlefield, deal with them very sternly, so as to strike terror among them, and to serve as a lesson for their successors. Perhaps, they would remember
8|58|If you (have reason to) fear treachery and violation (of the pact) by any nation, then throw (their pact) back at them (openly and) in a fair manner. Of course Allah does not like the treacherous
8|59|Let the unbelievers not think that they can (outrun and) escape. Of course, they cannot frustrate (Allah)
8|60|Acquire and prepare all the (military) strength you can muster, including the finest trained horses (and other military wares). With that, you would daunt and deter the enemies of Allah _ your enemies, and others besides them. You do not know them, but Allah (surely) knows them. Anything you spend in the path of Allah will be returned to you in full. You will not be wronged (at all)
8|61|If they _ (the enemies) _ seem inclined to make peace, then you too should lean towards it. Place your trust in Allah. Indeed, He is all-Hearing, and all-Knowing
8|62|Allah will be sufficient on your behalf, should they intend to deceive you (by the offer of peace). It is He Who strengthened you by providing His support, and by providing the believing followers
8|63|It is He Who caused the hearts of the believers to bind together (with love). Had you spent all that exists on this earth, you could not have secured their hearts (with bonds of brotherhood). Yet Allah has brought their hearts together. Indeed, He is the most Powerful, the Wisest
8|64|Oh prophet! Allah is enough for you, and for those of the believers who follow you
8|65|Oh prophet! Urge the believers to fight (for His cause). If, among you there are twenty patient and steadfast men, they would triumph over two hundred. A hundred of you would overcome a thousand unbelievers, since they are a people who do not understand
8|66|At present Allah has eased your burden. He knows that you (still) have weakness (within your ranks). For now if, among you there are a hundred steadfast and patient men, they would triumph over two hundred. By the will of Allah, a thousand of you would triumph over two thousand. Allah is certainly with those who are patient and enduring
8|67|It is not (befitting) for the prophet to take prisoners (during the battle) until he had thoroughly crushed (the enemy) in the land. You desire the lure of this world, while Allah intends (to give you) the (eternal) life to come. Allah is the most Powerful, the Wisest
8|68|Had it not been for the preordained decree of Allah, a severe torment would have struck you because of what you took
8|69|So, (enjoy and) partake of the booty you took (in battle). It is lawful and wholesome for you. And fear Allah; indeed, Allah is the most Forgiving, the most Merciful
8|70|Oh prophet, say to those who are the prisoners in your hands, "If Allah finds anything good in your hearts, He will grant you something even better than what was taken from you; and He will forgive your sins. Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
8|71|If they intend treachery against you, (remember) they have already betrayed Allah. Therefore, He granted you power over them. Allah is the all-Knowing, the Wisest
8|72|Indeed, those who believed, left their homes, and waged a struggle for the cause of Allah as well as those who helped them and gave them shelter are each other´s friends and allies. But you owe no obligation to those who failed to emigrate (and leave their homes) _ even though they believe _ until they do emigrate. However, if they seek your assistance in matters of faith, then you must help them, except against any nation with whom you have a pact of alliance. Allah (vigilantly) watches everything you do
8|73|The unbelievers are each other´s friends and allies. Unless you do your part, confusion and chaos will prevail and a rampant corruption will wage in the land
8|74|Those who believed, left their homes and waged a struggle for the cause of Allah as well as those who helped and protected them are really the true believers. There is forgiveness for them and a generous rewards
8|75|Those who believed later, left their homes and waged the struggle along with you, are part of you. But according to Allah´s book of decrees, the blood relatives are closer to each other (and so inherit from each other). Indeed, Allah is aware of every single thing
9|1|The abrogation of the pact (is hereby being proclaimed) by Allah and His messenger _ the pact you made with (some of) the polytheist (tribes)
9|2|So, (Oh idolaters)! you may (stay and) move about in the land (in peace) for four months. You should know that you shall definitely not render Allah powerless. Allah is surely going to disgrace you
9|3|An announcement for mankind from Allah and His messenger on the great day of Hajj (the pilgrimage): Allah and His messenger are free of any obligation concerning the Polytheists _ (those accepting partners with Allah). It is (Oh Idolaters!) better for you to (desist and) repent. For if you turn away, remember that you are unable to frustrate (and elude the grip of) Allah. So, warn the unbelievers of a painful punishment
9|4|Except for those polytheist with whom you entered into a pact, and who neither violated any of its conditions, nor aided others against you. Honor (all aspects of) the pact made with them, for the duration of its term. Indeed, Allah loves those who are pious
9|5|After the sacred months _ (the grace period of four months) _ have expired, slay them wherever you find them. Seize them, besiege them and lie in ambush for them at all possible places. But if they repent, establish ´salat´, and pay the ´zakat´, then let them go their way. Of course, Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
9|6|If any of the idolaters asks you for an asylum, give him refuge till he hears the word of Allah _ (the Qur´an). After that, escort him to a safe place. That, because they are a people who do not know
9|7|How can there exist an obligation (of the pact) upon Allah and His messenger in the case of the idolaters? Except for those with whom you entered into a pact in the vicinity of the Holy mosque. So, abide by the pact as long as they remain true (and abide). Indeed, Allah loves those who are dutiful
9|8|How (can there be a pact since) whenever they gain an upper hand over you they neither honor the kinship ties, nor the obligation of the pact. With their mouths they (utter words to) appease (and assuage) you, even though their hearts refuse. Most of them are (immoral and) rebellious
9|9|They traded away the verses (and signs) of Allah for a small gain. Thus, they prevented (people) from (following) His way. What they used to do was really despicable
9|10|In the case of the believers, they do not honor kinship ties, or the pact. Of course, it is they who are the offenders _ (the transgressors)
9|11|But if they repent, establish the ´salat´, and pay the ´zakat´, then they are your brothers in faith. For folks who have knowledge, We explain Our verses in detail
9|12|And if they enter into a pact, and yet violate their pledges and (begin to) malign (and defame) your faith, then fight the leaders of disbelief. Perhaps they would desist. Their oaths are not worthy of trust
9|13|Would you not fight against the people who violated their solemn pledges and conspired to expel the messenger (from his town). They began (hostilities) against you first, at the very start! Do you fear them? It is by far the right of Allah that you should fear Him (only). If you really do believe, (you would know)
9|14|Fight them! By your hands, Allah will punish them! He will disgrace them and give you victory over them. And He will confer cure (and composure) upon the hearts of the believing nation
9|15|He will rid the believers of the rage in their hearts. Allah accepts the repentance from whomever He wills. Allah is the most Aware, the Wisest
9|16|Did you suppose that you would be left alone (without being tested)? Allah has yet to (test and ) know who, amongst you, will strive the hardest in His path, and would not accept as an ally anyone besides Allah, His messenger and other believers. Allah is well Aware of everything you do
9|17|It is not (right) for the idolaters to act as the caretakers of the House of Allah. For they are the witnesses to their own disbelief (and rejection of faith). The (good) deeds of such people would come to naught. They shall be in the fire for eternity
9|18|In fact, the caretakers of the house of Allah should be those who believe in Allah and the Day of Judgment, establish the ´salat´, pay the ´zakat´, and fear nothing except Allah. Such people are more likely to be rightly guided
9|19|Do you regard the (deeds like) giving of water to the pilgrims to drink, and taking care of the mosque, to be (worth) the same as (the worth of) those who believe in Allah and the Day of Judgment, and strive for the cause of Allah? According to Allah, they are not equal! Allah does not guide the nation of evil doers
9|20|According to Allah, far higher in rank are those who believed, left their homes and waged a struggle with their wealth, and their lives. Such are the successful ones
9|21|Their Lord gives them the good news of His mercy, His approval, and their (very own) gardens (in paradise) where they shall have (exquisite) ever-lasting rewards
9|22|There, they shall live for ever and ever. Of course Allah has the most awesome rewards
9|23|Oh you who believe! Do not accept as allies (even) your father and your brother, if they prefer disbelief to faith. Those of you who befriend them are really the wrong doers
9|24|Say, "If (the worldly bonds) _ your father, sons, brothers, wives, other relatives, the wealth you have amassed, the business you fear to lose, and the house you are so fond of _ are dearer to you than Allah, His messenger and the struggle in His path, then wait till Allah renders His decision. Allah does not guide the sinful nation
9|25|Certainly, Allah had given you victories in many battles. In the battle of ´Hunain´, however, your superiority (over your enemy) because of greater number had pleased you. But it did not help you a bit. Despite its vastness, the earth closed in on you. You turned your back and ran
9|26|After that, Allah bestowed peace and serenity upon His messenger and the believers. To help you, He sent down the armies you could not see, and He punished those who denied the truth. Such is the due for the unbelievers
9|27|Even after all that, Allah will accept the repentance from whomever He wants. Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
9|28|Oh you believers, (remember)! those who ascribe partners to Allah are really unclean. Therefore, after (the pilgrimage) this year let them not come (anywhere) near the sacred mosque (in Makkah). If you fear poverty, Allah may soon enrich you as He wills. Indeed, Allah is the most Aware, the Wisest
9|29|Fight against the people of the book _ those of them who do not believe in Allah and the Last Day, do not forbid that which Allah and His messenger have forbidden, and do not follow the religion of truth. (Fight against them) till they (agree to) pay ´jazia´ (the submission tribute) and accept an inferior status
9|30|The Jews said, "Uzair (Ezra) is the son of Allah", and the Christians said, "Jesus is the son of Allah." These are (nothing but mere) words that escape their lips. They just (ape and) echo the words of the unbelievers of earlier times. Allah´s curse is upon them! How (easily) are they being deceived
9|31|Instead of Allah they accepted their scholars, their monks, and (above all) Jesus son of Mary, to be their gods. In fact, they were commanded to worship (none but) the One (true) God. There is no god but He. Exalted is He, far above the partners they associate with Him
9|32|They desire to snuff out the light of Allah huffing and puffing at it with their mouths _ (by uttering banalities) _ but Allah insists upon bringing His light to perfection, much to the chagrin of the unbelievers
9|33|He it is, Who sent His messenger with (true) guidance for an ideal way of life, in order to make it prevail over all the other systems of belief, much to the dislike of the polytheists
9|34|Oh you believers! In fact, a lot of rabbis and monks usurp the wealth of others wantonly, and with foul means. They turn people away from the path of Allah. So give the news of a painful punishment to those who amass gold and silver, instead of spending them in the path of Allah
9|35|That day _ (the Day of Judgment) _ their treasure would be heated up in the fire of hell. With that (red hot metal) their forehead, flanks and back shall be branded (and charred). "This is what you had saved up for yourself. Now taste what you had amassed
9|36|The fact is, the number of months according to Allah are twelve (in a year). It was so ordained by Allah at the time when He created the heavens and the earth. Four of those months are sacred. Therefore, do not commit a sin against yourself (by violating the sanctity of these months). Fight against the ´mushriqeen´ _ (those who ascribe partners for Allah) _ on all fronts with unity in your ranks, just as they fight you. Be aware, that surely Allah is with the pious
9|37|´Nasi´, (the postponement of the sacred months) is another instance (and example) of disbelief, (a practice) by which the unbelievers are led further astray. They deem a month ´not sacred´ one year and declare it to be sacred the next, in order to make up the numbers of sacred months (in a year). Thus, they (find a way to) legitimize what Allah has forbidden. Such an evil course seems pleasing to them. Allah does not guide the nation of unbelievers
9|38|Oh you who believe! What is the matter with you? When asked to (leave home and) go (into battle) for the sake of Allah, you drag your feet and cling to the ground. Do you prefer the life of this world to the afterlife? Compared to the afterlife, the possessions (and pleasures) of the life of this world are much too meager
9|39|If you do not proceed (into battle), Allah will inflict a painful punishment upon you. And in your place, He will bring another nation. You cannot harm Him a bit! Allah has (absolute) power over everything
9|40|If you fail to help the prophet, (Allah will)! Allah had certainly helped him when the unbelievers had driven him out (of the town). He was (at that time) one of the two. The two of them were (hiding) in a cave when he said to his companion, "Do not worry, Allah is with us." So Allah, by His grace, caused the (reassuring) peace and serenity to descend upon him. (Allah) strengthened him with forces you could not see. He brought the words (and slogans) of the unbelievers down to the lowest level, while the word of Allah is (always) Supreme. Allah is the Almighty, and the Wisest
9|41|Go forth (into battle), whether you are light or laden. With your wealth and life, wage a struggle for the cause of Allah. That is better for you, if you only know
9|42|They would have come out and accompanied you if the mission involved a quick gain or an easy journey, but the hardship of the long journey bothers them. Yet, (when you come back) they would swear by Allah and say, "If we could, we would have accompanied you." (Thus), they destroy their souls. Of course, Allah knows that they are the liars
9|43|May Allah forgive you! Why did you grant them permission (to stay behind)? Otherwise, it would have become evident to you who is sincere and who is the liar
9|44|Those who (really) believe in Allah and the Last Day would never ask you to exempt them from waging a struggle with their wealth and their life. Of course, Allah is very well aware of those who fear (Him)
9|45|Actually, those who do not believe in Allah and the Last Day are the ones asking you for an exemption. Their heart raises doubts and they waver in their doubts
9|46|If they had any intentions of going into battle, they would surely have prepared for it. But Allah did not like them to go, and He held them back. They were told, "(Go) sit (at home) along with those who (always) stay home
9|47|Had they gone (into battle) with you, they would have caused nothing but chaos within your ranks. They would be active in trying to corrupt (the morals and morale). There are some among you who do listen to them. Allah is well aware of the evil doers
9|48|They had sought to foment dissension and discord on an earlier occasion, too. They turned matters upside down to defeat you. But despite their hatred, the truth (victory) arrived and Allah´s decree became manifest
9|49|Among them are some who say, "Grant me leave. Do not put me through a test." Beware! A trial it is, intowhich they have (just) stumbled. Of course, the hellfire surrounds the unbelievers
9|50|It bothers them if something good comes your way. But if a disaster strikes you they say, "Good thing, we took precaution beforehand." And happily they turn away
9|51|Say, "Nothing will ever happen to us except what Allah has decreed for us. He is our (Patron and) Protector. The believers should place their trust (only) in Allah
9|52|Say, "In our case, what you await is (nothing except) one of the two wonderful gains _ (victory or martyrdom). And in your case, what we are waiting for, is whether Allah will punish you Himself, or by our hands. (So wait on) we (too) are waiting with you
9|53|Say, "What you contribute _ willingly or unwillingly _ would not be accepted. Indeed, you have (always) been an evil (sinful) nation
9|54|What prevented their contributions from being accepted is the fact that they did not believe in Allah and His messenger. When they come to offer ´salat´ they are (always) neglectful and indolent. When they spend (for the sake of Allah) they do so with resentment
9|55|Abundance of their wealth and children should not amaze you. In fact, with these (very things) Allah wants to punish them in the life of this world. (And He intends) that their souls depart (their bodies) in a state of disbelief
9|56|They swear by Allah that they certainly belong to you (and are with you). But they are not part of you. Rather, they are a people ridden with fear
9|57|Had they found a refuge _ a cave or a place of hiding _ they would have frantically rushed towards it; and they would remain defiant
9|58|Among them are those who find fault with you (Oh Muhammad, SAW) concerning the distribution of charity. They stay happy if they are given a share. But any time they do not receive (charity), they suddenly become enraged
9|59|Of course, (they would have fared better) had they been content with what Allah and His messenger gave them. If only they had said, "For us, Allah suffices. Allah will soon, by His Grace, grant us (riches) and (so will) His messenger. We turn to Allah (with our prayers)
9|60|In fact, the ´zakat´ is meant for the needy and the poor, as well as for those appointed to collect and distribute it. (In addition, it may be used) to win hearts over (to Islam), to free slaves and those in debt, (to wage a struggle) for the sake of Allah, and to help the wayfarer. It is an obligation imposed by Allah; and Allah is well aware, the Wisest
9|61|Among them are those who annoy and hurt the prophet by saying, "He is all ears _ (he lends his ears to all)." Say, "For your own good, he is all ears. He believes in Allah and trusts the believers; he is mercy for those of you who believe." There is a painful punishment for those of you who annoy the messenger of Allah
9|62|They invoke Allah and swear before you (the Muslims), in order to please you. However, Allah _ and so also His messenger _ has a greater right, so that if they are the (true) believers they should (try to) please Him
9|63|Do they not know that the fire of hell is for those who act contrary to (the commands of) Allah and His messenger? They shall stay there forever. That is the greatest disgrace
9|64|The hypocrites are afraid that a ´surah´ (of the Qur´an) might (soon) be revealed exposing whatever exists in their hearts. Say, "Make fun (all you want). But Allah is going to reveal that which you dread
9|65|If you were to ask them, they would surely say, "We were just joking and having fun." Say, "Are you having fun (and cutting jokes) about Allah, His verses and His messenger
9|66|Make no excuses, now. You have denied the truth, after first having professed belief. We may pardon some of you, but We would certainly punish others amongst you because they are really guilty
9|67|All hypocrites _ men as well as women _ resemble each other. They enjoin wickedness and forbid decency. They are tight-fisted (and do not spend for the cause of Allah). They forgot Allah, and so He forgot them. The hypocrites really are the evil doers
9|68|Allah promises the fire of hell for the hypocrite men and the hypocrite women, as well as for the unbelievers. They shall stay in it forever. It serves them right! Allah has cursed them. For them, there exists a (constant) ever-lasting torment
9|69|(You hypocrites are) like those (generations of hypocrites) before you who enjoyed their share (of life and leisure)! Compared to you they had more power. They had a lot more wealth and descendants. So, go ahead and enjoy your share (of life) just like those before you. Stay engrossed (and lost) in play and pleasure, just like those before you. Their efforts (and endeavors) amounted to nothing in the life of this world, or in the afterlife. Such are the losers
9|70|Has the news not reached them about the nations before them _ the nation of ´Nooh´, the ´Aads, and the ´Samoods, as well as the nation of Ibraheem, the people of Midian and the overthrown cities? The messengers brought them the clear proofs. Allah was not (at all) unjust to them. Rather, they used to wrong themselves
9|71|And the believers _ men and women _ are each other´s helpers and protectors; they enjoin the right and forbid the wrong. They establish the ´salat´, pay the ´zakat, and obey Allah and His messenger. It is they upon whom Allah will shower mercy. Indeed, Allah is the most Powerful and the Wisest
9|72|Allah has promised the believers _ men and women _ the paradise, right through which run the rivers. Till eternity, they shall live in the beautiful mansions, and in perpetual bliss. Above all, the acceptance and the approval of Allah are far greater. That is indeed the supreme triumph
9|73|Oh prophet, wage an utmost struggle against the unbelievers and the hypocrites, and be harsh with them. Hell fire is their abode, and it is the worst of the destinations
9|74|The hypocrites swear by Allah that they have said nothing (wrong); but surely they did utter the words of disbelief. After accepting Islam they have disbelieved! They attempted to do what they could not carry out. How hostile (and resentful) are they, simply because Allah, by His grace and through His messenger, enriched them! It would be to their advantage if they repented. However, if they turn away, Allah will torment them with a painful punishment in this world, as well as in the life-to-come. They do not have any friends or helpers in this world
9|75|There are those of them who pledged to Allah, (saying), "If He (ever) bestows His bounties upon us, we would most certainly spend in charity and be among the righteous
9|76|But when He bestowed His bounties upon them, they were stingy (and they withheld their wealth). Abandoning (their oaths), they went back (on their words)
9|77|Consequently, He planted hypocrisy in their heart right till they meet Him. (This is) because they went back on their promise with Allah, and because they used to lie
9|78|Do they not know that Allah is well Aware of their intrigues and their secret conferences? Of course, Allah is all-Knower of the unknown and the unseen
9|79|The hypocrites criticize the (true) believers who give charity willingly and beyond the call of duty, as well as those who find nothing (to give) except their own (physical) efforts (and struggles). They make fun of the believers. But Allah makes fun of the hypocrites. For them, there exists a painful punishment
9|80|(Oh Muhammad, SAW) you may beg forgiveness for them, or decide not to. Allah will certainly not forgive them, even if you sought forgiveness for them seventy times over. This is so, because they really did not believe in Allah and His messenger. Allah does not guide the (rebellious) sinful people
9|81|The hypocrites who stayed home and did not follow the messenger of Allah (on his mission) rejoice (over their inactive stance). They did not care to wage the struggle with their wealth and their life for the sake of Allah. (Rather), they said (to others), "Do not go forth (into battle) in this heat." Say, "The fire of hell is hotter and far worse!" If only they understood
9|82|Now, let them laugh sparingly and weep a lot; (such is) the result of what they used to commit
9|83|Should Allah bring you back to a group of (these) hypocrites, and should they seek your permission to go out (into battle for you), tell them (plainly), "You shall never accompany me (into battle) ever again. You shall never fight the enemy with me. You were content with sitting idle (and inactive) on the first occasion. Now, sit still in the company of those who (always) stay behind
9|84|(Oh Muhammad, SAW) do not ever offer (the funeral) prayer for them when any of them dies. Do not ever stand (and pray) by his graveside. They certainly disbelieved Allah and His messenger, and died as evil doers (and disobedient ones)
9|85|Let (the abundance of) their wealth and children not surprise you. By these means, Allah plans to punish them in (the life of) this world, so that their souls shall depart (their bodies) while they are still the unbelievers
9|86|As soon as a chapter (of the Qur´an) is revealed (instructing them), "Believe in Allah and wage a struggle along with His messenger" the able bodied (and well to do) among them ask to be exempted. They say, "Leave us (behind). Let us be among those who sit at home
9|87|They opt to remain content among (the women and) those who sit behind (at home). A seal is placed upon their heart, (so) they do not understand
9|88|But the messenger, and the believers with him, wage a struggle with their wealth and their life. Those are the ones for whom all the good things exist. Such are the successful ones
9|89|For them, Allah has prepared the paradise, right through which run the rivers. They will live there forever. That is the greatest triumph
9|90|Among the Bedouin Arabs, (too), are those who offered excuses and came to seek exemption (from the battle). In this manner, those who had lied to Allah and His messenger sat around (at home). A painful punishment will strike those of them who disbelieve
9|91|There is no blame upon the weak and old, or the sick, or those who do not find any resources to spend (for the sake of Allah), provided they are (loyal and) sincere to Allah and His messenger. There is no reason to blame the righteous. Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
9|92|Nor (is there any blame) upon those who came to you requesting that you arrange transport for them. They went back when you said, "I find nothing to provide you with the means of transport." Their eyes welled up with tears and they were saddened because they found no means to pay for their expenses
9|93|Actually, the blame is upon those who are able and well off, yet ask your permission to be exempted (from battle). They are happy to be with those who stay behind _ (the women, the old and the sick). Allah has placed a seal on their hearts, but they do not realize
9|94|When you return to them (from your mission), they will give you (many) excuses (for their conduct). Say, "Make no excuses. We won´t believe you. Allah has already told us the truth about you. (Henceforth), Allah and His messenger will monitor your deeds. Finally, you would be brought before the One Who knows (both) the unseen and the seen, and He will tell you what you used to do
9|95|When you come back to them (from your mission), they will invoke Allah´s name and swear before you, so you may (disregard and) overlook (their conduct). Turn away from them. They (really) are filthy, and hell is their abode _ the just reward for what they used to commit
9|96|They would swear so that you would be pleased with them. You may be pleased with them, but surely Allah is not pleased with the evil doing (disobedient) folk
9|97|When it comes to disbelief and hypocrisy, the Bedouin Arabs are the worst. They are the least likely to know the limits (of the laws) that Allah has revealed to His messenger. Allah (alone) is all-Knowing and the Wisest
9|98|Among the Bedouin Arabs are some who spend (per your instructions), but consider it a penalty and a fine. They are waiting for your fortune to change for the worst. The misfortune will in fact overwhelm them! Allah is the all-Hearing and the all-Knowing
9|99|Among the Bedouin Arabs are (also) those who believe in Allah and the Last Day. They regard what they spend as a means to draw closer to Allah, and (a means to receive) the messenger´s prayers. But of course, it does bring proximity (to Him). Soon, Allah will usher them in His Mercy and Grace. Indeed, Allah is the oft-Forgiving and the most Merciful
9|100|Allah is well pleased with the foremost ones among the ´mohajirs´ _ (those who migrated with the messenger from Makkah to Medina) and the ´ansars´ _ (those who helped the ´mohajirs´), and the others who followed them in good faith. They (too) are well pleased with Him. For them, He has prepared the paradise, through which run the rivers. They shall live there forever and ever. That is the greatest triumph
9|101|Many of the Bedouin Arabs around you as well as (many of) the people of ´Al-medina´ are hypocrites. You do not know them, but We know them (quite well). Soon, We will inflict upon them twice the punishment. After that they shall be brought back for the gravest of punishment
9|102|There are others who acknowledge their offense. They have mixed their righteous deeds with other deeds that are bad. Allah might just turn towards them in forgiveness. Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
9|103|Levy the charitable offering from their wealth, thereby purifying and cleansing them. Pray for them! Indeed, your prayers are a source of comfort for them. Allah is all-Hearing, and all-Knowing
9|104|Do they not know that it is Allah (alone) Who accepts repentance from His servants, and receives charity? Indeed, it is Allah Who is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
9|105|And say, "Do your duty! Allah, His messenger and other believers would observe your deeds. Then, (in the end) you would be brought back before the One Who knows (both) the unseen and the seen. He will tell you everything you have been doing
9|106|There are (still) others who await the decision of Allah; He may either punish them, or forgive them. Allah is all-Aware, the Wisest
9|107|Those (hypocrites) who built a (parallel) mosque did so in order to foment mischief, disbelief and dissension among the believers, and also to provide a retreat and a (secret) sanctuary for the person who had always waged a war against Allah and His messenger. They would definitely swear that (by building that mosque) they had intended nothing but good. But Allah bears witness that they are certainly the liars
9|108|Do not ever set foot in that mosque. In fact, the mosque that was based and built on piety right from the first day is definitely a far better (and worthier) place for you to stand in prayers. In that mosque are men who like to keep themselves clean and pure. Of course, Allah loves those who keep themselves clean and pure
9|109|So, who will fare better (do you think)? The one who raised his building on piety and the pleasure (and approval) of Allah, or the one who raised his building upon the brink of a crumbling water-worn precipice. It will crumble and topple him right into the fire of hell. Allah does not guide the nation of wrong doers
9|110|Such a structure they built will always continue to raise doubts in their hearts until their hearts are torn to pieces (and they die). Allah is all-Aware and the Wisest
9|111|Allah has certainly purchased from the believers their life and their wealth in return for paradise. They fight for the sake of Allah; they slay and are slain. It is a (firm and) binding promise made by Him, and repeated in the Torah, the Gospels and the Qur´an. And who could be truer to his promise than Allah? So be happy with the bargain you have just transacted. That, indeed, is the tremendous triumph
9|112|(Believers are) those who turn in repentance (towards Him), worship Him, praise Him, observe fasts, bow before Him (in prayers) and prostrate before Him (in prayers). They encourage and enjoin the good and forbid the wrong (and the evil); they observe (and honor) the limits set by Allah. Give the good tidings to the believers
9|113|It is not proper for the prophet, nor for the believers to pray for the forgiveness of the idolaters, though they may be their kin. Particularly now, when it is known to the believers that the idolaters are surely the people of the hellfire
9|114|The prayers of Ibraheem for his father´s forgiveness was only because of the promise he had made (to his father). He quit as soon as it became obvious to him that his father was the enemy of Allah. Ibraheem was really soft of heart and compassionate
9|115|Once He guides a people, Allah is not apt to lead them astray until He has made plain to them all the things they must avoid. Of course, Allah is aware of all things
9|116|The kingdom of the heavens and the earth certainly belongs to Allah. He gives life and death. You do not have, besides Allah, any friend or helper
9|117|With His mercy, Allah has turned towards the prophet as well as those of the ´mohajirs´ and the ´ansars´ who stood by him during the hour of hardship. But the hearts of a group of them had almost faltered and strayed. Then, He accepted their repentance. Certainly, He is full of kindness for them; He is the most Merciful
9|118|Allah also forgives the three whose matter had been delayed. The earth with all its vastness had closed in on them. Even their own life became utterly constrained, and they realized that they had nowhere to turn except towards Allah. Then, Allah turned to them with kindness, so that they may turn to Him with repentance. Certainly, it is Allah Who accepts repentance; He is the most Merciful
9|119|Oh you who believe! Fear Allah, and be with those who are truthful
9|120|It was not proper for the people of ´Al-Medina´, and the Bedouin Arabs living nearby, to lag behind (and abandon) the messenger of Allah. Nor (was it proper for them) to care for their own life more than the life of the messenger. This is so, because whatever actions they undertake (for Allah) _ whether they endure thirst, fatigue and hunger for the sake of Allah or take measure that infuriate the unbelievers, or inflict damage upon the enemy _ is recorded to their credit as virtuous deeds. Of course Allah does not waste the rewards of the righteous
9|121|Everything they spend _ be it a small donation or large _ and every valley they cross (in the path of Allah) is recorded to their credit. So that Allah may reward them for the good deeds they had performed
9|122|It is not essential for all believers to (leave home and) go out to fight at the same time. But why didn´t a party of men leave from each group? (They should have), so as to acquire a better understanding of the matters of faith, and so that they may warn their folk when they returned to them. Perhaps, they would heed
9|123|Oh you who believe! Fight the unbelievers who are close and dear to you. Let them find in you a (firmness and) harshness (of resolve). Be aware that Allah is surely with the pious
9|124|Whenever a (new) chapter (of the Qur´an) is revealed, some of the hypocrites ask (each other mockingly), "Which one of you has experienced an increase of belief by this (revelation)?" Meanwhile, the believers rejoice because it does cause their belief to surge
9|125|It merely adds (and pours) more filth _ (doubt and disbelief) _ upon those who have a disease in their hearts. They die as unbelievers
9|126|Do they not see that they are being tested once or twice each year? Yet, they do not turn in repentance; they (just) do not learn their lesson
9|127|Whenever a chapter (of the Qur´an) is revealed, they glance at each other (as if to say), "Is anyone watching you?" Then they withdraw (and slip away quietly). Allah has turned their hearts away, because they are a people who do not understand
9|128|(Oh people)! A messenger has surely come to you from amongst your own kind. He is genuinely concerned about the distress you might incur (in the afterlife). He eagerly (and sincerely) wants you to be the believers; and he is kind and polite to you
9|129|Yet, if they turn away, say, "Allah is enough for me. There is no god but He. In Him do I place my trust. He is the Lord of the Mighty Throne
10|1|ALif, Laam, Raa. These are the verses of the book of wisdom
10|2|Were people surprised that We sent (Our) revelation to a man in their midst? It is to forewarn people and to hand down the good news to those who opt to believe. Theirs is the status of honor with their Lord! The unbelievers (however) said, "Surely, he is nothing but a clever magician
10|3|Allah, your Lord, is the One Who created the heavens and the earth in six periods of time. He then, mounted His throne; He manages and administers His domain. No one can intervene without His permission! Such is Allah, your Lord! So, worship Him! Do you not pay attention
10|4|You will return to Him, all of you! Allah´s promise is inviolable! He initiates (the process of) creation and He will renew it, so that He may justly reward those who believe and do good deeds. Because of their rejection, the unbelievers will receive scalding hot water to drink and a painful punishment
10|5|He made the sun bright; He made the moon lustrous and destined several stages for it, so you may count the years and have a calendar! Allah created all that with a supreme purpose! He expands the significance of His signs for any nation with understanding
10|6|Surely, for any nation that fears, there is ample proof in the (alternation of the) night and the day, as well as in that which Allah has created in the heavens and the earth
10|7|There are those who do not entertain any thoughts of meeting Us (after death) and are contented and well pleased with the life of this world. They are the ones who totally ignore Our proofs
10|8|Fire shall be their abode because of the (evil) deeds they commit in this life
10|9|As for those who believe and do good deeds, Allah will guide them to a place _ the blissful garden of paradise _ through which run the rivers. All that is in return for their belief
10|10|There, they will say, "Exalted are You, our Lord"; their salutation there will be "Peace!" They will conclude their prayers by saying, "All praise is for Allah, the Lord of the universe
10|11|The matter would have been put to rest, had Allah also rushed to harm them like they run after the worldly gains (and riches)! We have abandoned those who do not expect to meet Us; they are absorbed in their rebellious defiance
10|12|When calamity strikes man, he continually calls Us ___ reclining, sitting and standing. When We relieve his distress, he turns back, as if he had never called Us during times of distress. Thus, (Allah has so ordained that) to those guilty of excess, their deeds appear adorable
10|13|We annihilated many towns prior to you, because their residents became unjust and evil. The messengers brought them clear proofs, yet they were determined not to believe! This is how We punish the criminal nations
10|14|After them, We had you inherit the earth, to see how you act
10|15|Those not expecting to meet Us (after death), listen to the unambiguous verses recited to them and they say, "Bring us a different Qur´an or at least change it!" Tell them, "I cannot change it of my own accord. I only follow that which was revealed to me. I fear the punishment on that great day, if I were to disobey my Lord
10|16|Say, "Had Allah so willed, I would not have recited it to you, nor talked to you about it. Prior to this, I have spent my entire life with you. Do you not think about it
10|17|Who could be worse than the one inventing lies about Allah and modifying His verses? Surely, (such) criminals do not prosper
10|18|They worship, besides Allah, those who could not inflict any harm upon them, nor grant them any benefits. They say, "They will intercede (on our behalf) with Allah." Say, "Are you telling Allah that? Is it something He is not aware of in the heavens and the earth?" He is exalted and far above all that they are ascribing
10|19|To begin with, people had only one religion. Later on, they differed. Their disputes would have been settled, but the word has already gone out from your Lord (that this world is a test, the next is for punishment and reward)
10|20|They say, "Why has he not been granted a miracle from his Lord?" Say, "The divine secret is Allah´s domain exclusively. So, go ahead, keep watch! Surely, I too am waiting along with you
10|21|When We let the bad times go by, and let people enjoy Our blessings, they start playing games with Our verses (and commands). Say, "Allah is really swifter at playing such tricks." Our angels are writing down all that you are plotting and scheming
10|22|He lets you move about in the world, by land and by sea. As they sail by ship well pleased by the favorable winds, suddenly the weather turns nasty and the waves come slapping about from all directions. They feel overwhelmed. At such a time they abandon all others and call Allah exclusively. Pleading solely to Him, they say, "If only You rescue us now, we would stay grateful forever
10|23|When We rescue them, they go back to doing injustice and oppression in this world, in defiance of the truth. "Oh people, when you commit an outrage, you actually do so upon your own selves. Your possessions are mere provisions for the life of this world. Then you have to return to Us. At that time We shall tell you everything you used to do
10|24|The example of the life of this world: He caused water to come down from the sky, causing all kinds of plants to grow _ food for man as well as cattle. Once the land turns lush and green and the residents believe this to be their destiny, suddenly Our orders arrive by day or by night and the land is left barren and in ruins _ as if it never had been green. Thus, He explains the signs in detail for the nation that ponders
10|25|Allah calls towards the house of peace. He guides, whomever He wants, towards the straight path
10|26|Those doing good deeds shall receive gratifying rewards _ and then some. Dark shadows and disgrace will not cover their faces. They shall be the residents of paradise, and they shall stay there forever
10|27|But those committing evil deeds shall receive punishment equal to their deeds. Disgrace will drench them from above. They shall have nobody to rescue them. Their faces would be dark, as if night has come to settle over them. They are the inmates of the hell-fire; in it shall they stay forever
10|28|That day, We will gather all of them together. Then, to those guilty of ´shirk´ (associating partners with Allah), We will say, "Stay where you are, you as well as your partners!" We will separate them. Those partners will then cry out, "You never worshipped us at all
10|29|Allah is sufficient as a witness between us. We were, of course, totally oblivious of your worship
10|30|There, all souls will assess their past deeds, and they will be referred back to Allah, their real Patron. None of their fabricated lies would be of any avail to them
10|31|Say, "Who grants you provisions from the sky, and from the earth? And who holds sway over the ears and the eyes? Who causes the living to emerge from the dead, and the dead from the living? Who regulates all these things?" They will concur and reply, "Allah!" Say, "Do you then, not fear Him
10|32|Such is Allah, your true Lord! Apart from the truth, what else is there, except lies (and misguidance)? So, where are you turning away to
10|33|Thus, your Lord´s word came to pass for the sinners. Surely, they are the ones who do not believe
10|34|Say, "Does any of the partners (you ascribe to Allah) initiates creation, and then renews it?" Say, "Allah has initiated the creation and He will start it anew. So, aren´t you being misled
10|35|Ask them, "Does any of the partners (you ascribe) guides towards the truth?" Say, "Allah guides towards the truth! So, which one merits your obedience? The one who guides towards the truth, or the one who does not, and instead remains in need of guidance? What is the matter with you? How do you make your choices
10|36|Most of them follow nothing but conjectures. When it comes to the truth, conjectures do not suffice at all. Surely, Allah has the real knowledge of what they are doing
10|37|This Qur´an isn´t a thing any one can invent, except Allah. Indeed, it confirms and expands upon the scriptures that already exist _ (the Torah and the Gospels). It contains nothing doubtful; and it is from the Lord of the Universe
10|38|Do they say he has made it up himself? If you are truthful, bring just one such chapter; and except Allah, call any one you can (to help)
10|39|Actually, they rejected that, (the Qur´an), which they failed to comprehend. Its full significance has yet not dawned upon them. Those before them, too, had rejected! So, observe their fate! What became of the evildoers
10|40|There are those among them who believe, and those who do not. Your Lord is better aware of the mischief-makers
10|41|Should they reject you, say, "I have my task and you have yours; you are absolved of anything I do, just as I am blameless for your acts
10|42|Among them are those who seem to hear you. Would you then, try to make the deaf hear, even though he understands nothing
10|43|Among them are those who appear to look at you! Will you then try to guide the blind, even though he sees nothing
10|44|Surely, Allah does not oppress people unjustly. Rather, people treat their own selves unjustly
10|45|That day, We will gather them together. They will feel as if they did not stay (in this world) for more than just a single hour of a day, and only to get to know each other. They became the losers because they rejected the inevitable meeting with Allah! They were not well guided
10|46|We may let you witness some of what We have promised them, or We may first give you death. Towards Us is their return journey! Allah is the witness of everything they have done
10|47|Each generation had its messenger. Once the message is delivered, the matter is decided justly. Nobody is dealt with unfairly
10|48|They ask, "If you are truthful, when will that promise come about
10|49|Say, "I do not have power to harm or benefit even myself, except what Allah wants. Each generation has an appointed time! When the time comes, it can neither be advanced nor delayed, even by a moment
10|50|Say, "The punishment might come any time during the night or the day. What do you think? What would the criminals accomplish by seeking to hasten it
10|51|Are you planning to believe after it comes, and is already upon you?" (They will be told), "Now (you believe)! You had wanted to hasten it
10|52|The evildoers would be told, "Taste the eternal torment! Could your reward be any different from what your actions deserve
10|53|They ask you to counsel them, "Is it the absolute truth?" Say, "It is, I swear by my Lord! It is surely the truth! And you cannot prevent it
10|54|Had each sinful soul owned everything in this world, it will be ready to offer the entire world as a ransom. As they see the torment, they will conceal their regret and remorse. Their matter will be decided and put to rest with justice. They shall not be treated unjustly
10|55|Beware! Everything in the heavens and on the earth belongs to Allah! Be very sure! The promise of Allah is absolutely true! Yet most people do not know
10|56|He gives life and He gives death, and to Him you shall all return
10|57|Oh you people! An advice has come to you from your Lord. It is the remedy for (doubt,) that which lies within the heart. It is the guidance and mercy for all those who believe
10|58|Say, "They should be pleased with the mercy and the blessing of Allah. It is far better than what they amass
10|59|Say, "What about the provisions Allah has sent down for you? (On your own), you declare some (of them) to be unlawful, others lawful. Has Allah permitted you to do that? Or do you invent lies about Allah
10|60|What do they _ those inventing lies about Allah _ think about the Day of Judgment? Allah is very generous to His servants, but most of them are ungrateful
10|61|We personally observe all your affairs, whether you recite from the Qur´an, or are absorbed in any other activity! Not a single particle on earth, or in the heavens __ nor anything smaller or larger __ is ever out of your Lord´s attention. Everything is clearly spelled out in a clear record
10|62|Beware! The friends of Allah shall have no fear; nor shall they ever grieve (or be sorry)
10|63|Those who believe and guard against evil
10|64|The glad tidings are for them in this world, and in the afterlife. The words of Allah are immutable! That, indeed, is a tremendous triumph
10|65|Let their remarks not aggrieve you! Honor and power of all sorts belong to Allah! He hears all and knows all
10|66|Beware! Everyone in the heavens and on the earth belongs to Allah! Those calling others besides Allah are not following any ´partners´ (of Allah). They merely run with their assumptions. They only indulge in conjectures
10|67|He has made the night, so you may find rest; and He has made the day bright. Surely, in it are proofs for any nation willing to listen
10|68|They say, "Allah has taken a son!" Exalted is He! He is free of all needs! Everything in the heavens and on the earth belongs to Him! Do you have an authority to say that? Or do you claim about Allah that, concerning which you have no knowledge
10|69|Say, "Liars, who invent falsehood about Allah, do not prosper
10|70|Their possessions are but small provisions for this life only! Later, they must journey back to Us! Then, because of their disbelief, We shall have them taste a severe torment
10|71|Recite the story of Nooh to them. He said to his people, "Oh my people! Is my presence and my advice, based on the revelations of Allah, too harsh for you to bear? I place my trust in Allah. Get together with the partners (you ascribe to Allah) and decide your plan. Let neither grief nor anxiety hold you back! Go ahead, do your worst to me. Do not allow me a respite
10|72|Should you turn away, remember! I did not ask any remuneration from you! My reward is only with Allah! I have been ordered to be obedient (to Him alone)
10|73|They rejected him! So, aboard a ship, We rescued him, and those with him. We appointed them the successors, and We drowned those who rejected Our signs! Now, observe the fate of those who had been forewarned
10|74|Then, after him We raised other messengers, who brought clear proofs to other people. (But) nothing changed their minds. They failed to accept that which they had rejected at the outset. Thus, We place a seal on the hearts of those guilty of excess
10|75|Later, We raised Musa and Haroon, armed them with Our clear proofs and sent them to the Pharaoh and his chiefs. But, haughtily they rejected the proofs. They were indeed, a criminal nation
10|76|When confronted with the proofs revealed by Us, they said, "Surely, it is just witchcraft
10|77|Musa responded, "Is that how you treat the truth when it comes to you? You call it magic? The magicians, however, never thrive
10|78|They said, "We found our parents upon a particular way. Have you come to direct us away from the religion of our parents, so that your authority may prevail in the land? We are not going to believe the two of you
10|79|The Pharaohs ordered, "Have all the expert magicians summoned before me
10|80|When the magicians arrived, Musa said to them, "Cast your spells, if you would
10|81|When they did, Musa said, "Surely, what you have wrought is just magic! Allah will inactivate it! Allah does not correct the acts of the mischievous ones
10|82|And with His words, Allah affirms the truth, much to the chagrin of the criminals
10|83|Nobody, except a few of his people believed in Musa. (Nonetheless) they feared harassment by the Pharaoh and his people! In the land, the Pharaoh was overbearingly powerful; he was surely guilty of excess
10|84|And Musa said, "Oh my people! If you believe in Allah and are obedient, you must place your trust in Him
10|85|They responded, "In Allah do we trust! Oh our Lord, do not turn us into a test for the evil nation
10|86|And by Your mercy, rescue us from the unbelieving nation
10|87|We sent revelation to Musa and his brother ordering them to pick a house for their people in Egypt, to turn it into a Qibla (a place to face during prayers), and to establish the ´salat´. Give the glad tidings to the believers
10|88|And Musa said, "Our Lord, You surely have given the Pharaoh and his chiefs wealth and adornments in the life of this world. Our Lord, this so they lead people away from Your way. Our Lord! Efface their wealth and stiffen their hearts. Let them not believe, right until they witness the agonizing punishment
10|89|(Allah) said, "Your prayers have been accepted! Remain steadfast (you two)! And do not adopt the ways of those who do not know
10|90|And We had the Israelites traverse the river. With hostile intentions, the Pharaoh followed with his armies; he sought revenge. When he became sure of drowning, he cried out, "I now believe! There is no god except Allah, in whom the Israelites believe. I hereby submit! I am a Muslim
10|91|Now you believe! You hadn´t before! And you were among the mischievous ones
10|92|Today, We shall preserve your mortal remains, so you may become a lesson for your successors! Most people are really unmindful of Our signs
10|93|We gave the Israelites really nice residences and granted them good provisions. Yet they began disputing after the knowledge had already come to them. On the Day of Judgment, your Lord will surely dispense His decision regarding everything they quarreled about
10|94|Should you be in doubt about the revelation sent by Us, ask those before you, who are used to reciting the (divine) book. Indeed, the absolute truth from your Lord has come to you. Do not hesitate or entertain doubts
10|95|And do not be among those who refuse to heed the signs of Allah, else you will be the loser
10|96|There are those against whom the word of your Lord has come to pass. They will not believe
10|97|Not even when confronted by all the signs! Not until they see the agonizing punishment by themselves
10|98|Except the people of Yunus, no town benefited by their belief (after witnessing the punishment). We lifted the humiliating punishment from them in the life of this world; We had them enjoy the benefits for a while
10|99|Had your Lord so wished, every soul upon this earth __ every single one of them __ would believe. Can you then, force people to believe
10|100|No soul can believe except with Allah´s permission! And He hurls filth upon those who refuse to think and pay attention
10|101|Say, "Look at what lies in the heavens and on earth!" All the signs and all the warnings fail to convince those who just would not believe
10|102|Are they waiting for such hard times to afflict them as afflicted the earlier people? Tell them, "Go ahead and wait! I, too, shall wait along with you
10|103|Then, We rescued Our messengers and those who believed. Thus, it is mandatory for Us to rescue all believers
10|104|Say, "Oh you people! If you have doubts about my way, know it that I do not worship those whom you worship besides Allah. Rather, I worship Allah, the same One Who gives death to all of you! I am commanded to be a believer
10|105|And to stand firm on faith, forsaking all else, and not to be amongst those who associate partners with Him
10|106|Do not implore anyone other than Allah. No one (but Allah) can grant you any benefits, nor cause you any harm! Otherwise, you surely would be among the evil doers
10|107|If Allah inflicts a distress upon you, no body can grant relief except He. If He wants to grant you a favor, no one can deflect His blessing away from you. He sends His mercy upon any of His servants He wants. And He is the most Forgiving and the most Kind
10|108|Say, "Oh you people! The truth has come to you. It is from your Lord! So, whoever accepts the guidance, does so for his own good. Whoever fails to do so, will only lead himself astray. I am not a guardian over you
10|109|Keep following that which is revealed to you, and remain steadfast, right until Allah pronounces His verdict. He is absolutely the Best of the judges
11|1|Alif, Laam, Raa. In the verses of this book (the Qur´an), orders have been revealed and then fully explained by the Wisest and the most Aware
11|2|(Say),"You must worship only Allah. Surely, I am a warner for you all, and a bearer of good news
11|3|Seek forgiveness of your Lord, and turn to Him! He will have you enjoy excellent provisions till a specified time. (And in the life-to-come) He will grant a lot more to those who do plenty of good deeds. However, if you turn away (then remember) I am really worried for you about a torment on that great day
11|4|Towards Allah is your return journey and He is capable of accomplishing all things
11|5|Beware! In order to hide from Him they double their chest up, and wrap themselves up with clothes. Even then, He knows what they utter in secret, and what they declare openly. Surely, He even knows that which lies buried deep in their hearts
11|6|The obligation to feed all living beings on the earth is upon Allah. He knows their resting places and their final depositories. Everything is inscribed in a clear book
11|7|And it is He Who created the heavens and the earth in six periods of time _ His throne was over water _ in order to test you and to see which of you performs better deeds! In fact, when told that after death they will be raised (back to life), the unbelievers say, "This is definitely magic
11|8|When We postpone the punishment for a brief period, they taunt, "What kept it?" Beware! The day it (actually) lands on them, they will not be able to keep it away. That which they joke about, will engulf them
11|9|When We deprive man of Our blessing after first having him taste it for a while, he turns blue, becomes ungrateful and loses all hope
11|10|On the other hand when, after a period of hardship, We let him taste Our blessings, he says, "The bad times are finally over" and he starts to boast
11|11|But those who are steadfast and do good deeds (do not boast); theirs shall be the forgiveness and a tremendous reward
11|12|(Oh prophet)! Perhaps you would (feel inclined to) give up a part of the revelation. Perhaps your chest tightens up when they, (the unbelievers), taunt, "Why was a treasure not sent down for him?" and "Why did an angel not accompany him?" Actually, you are there only to warn, and Allah is responsible for all matters
11|13|Do they claim that he has made it up himself? Say, "If that is true, bring us ten such made up chapters, and call for help anyone you can, besides Allah
11|14|Since they fail to respond, know for sure that this is being revealed to you by the knowledge of Allah, and that there is no god except He! Now, will you submit (lit: be Muslims)
11|15|Those who prefer the life of this world and its décor will have their due in this life? We will reward their actions and deeds in full right here! They shall not be shortchanged
11|16|Such people will have nothing in the life-to-come except hellfire. All their efforts in this life will be wasted. All their deeds are in vain
11|17|Can there be any likeness between the unbelievers and those following the clear proof from their Lord (the Qur´an), recited to them by His witness. Prior to this, the book of Musa served as a guide, and was a blessing. Fire is the promised place of abode for whichever sect refuses to believe (the Qur´an). Hence do not be in two minds about it. Very definitely, it is the absolute truth from your Lord, but most people do not believe
11|18|So, who can be more in error than the one inventing lies about Allah? They will be presented before their Lord. Witnesses will affirm that they were really the ones inventing lies about their Lord. Beware! Allah´s curse is upon the evil doers
11|19|Those who dissuade others from the path of Allah and try to find fault with it, actually do not believe in the afterlife
11|20|Such people will not be able to escape (Allah´s punishment) in the land. Besides Allah, they have no friends. Their torment shall be twice as severe. They carried on as if they were incapable of listening. They did not (try to) see
11|21|They are the ones who placed themselves in a losing situation. The lies they had invented, eluded them
11|22|No doubt at all! They will be the real losers in the life-to-come
11|23|Those who believe, do good deeds and stand in humility before their Lord are the residents of paradise. There, they shall live forever
11|24|The example of the two groups: one is blind and deaf while the other sees clearly and hears well. Can these two groups fare alike? So then, do you not think clearly
11|25|We sent Nooh towards his people, and he said, "I have come to you with a clear warning
11|26|That you must not worship anyone other than Allah. For you I am afraid of a torment on a painful day
11|27|The chiefs of the disbelieving nation said, "We find you to be no more than a human like us, and we find that only those of lower status and immature opinion follow you. We do not find you superior to us in any way. In fact, we think you are a liar
11|28|He said, "Oh my people, do you not see? My Lord has blessed me with clear proofs by His grace, but you remain oblivious of it. What can we do to convince you, if you are full of hatred
11|29|And, oh my people! I am not asking for any compensation in return. My reward, if any, is with Allah. I am not going to shun the believers. Indeed, they will meet their Lord! But I see that you are an irrational people
11|30|And, oh my people, who will help me against Allah if I were to shun them! So, why don´t you heed
11|31|I do not claim to have the treasures of Allah, or to be aware of the unknown, or to be an angel. I don´t agree with you that Allah will never award anything good to those you consider humble. Allah knows well what is in their hearts. I would be an evildoer if I shunned them
11|32|They said, "Oh Nooh, you have quarreled with us a lot! Enough of that now! If you are honest, go ahead and have that promise (punishment) wrought upon us
11|33|(Nooh) said, "Allah, if He wants, will inflict (the punishment) on you. You are really unable to prevent it
11|34|Even though I advise you sincerely, my advice will not benefit you if Allah wants to lead you astray. He is your Lord and you would have to return to Him
11|35|Do they say he has made it all up? Say, "If I have made it up, I will face the blame. I, too, am absolved of the sins you commit
11|36|Nooh received the revelation, "Surely, now none of your people will believe, other than those who already have! Do not grieve over their deeds
11|37|Build a boat under Our supervision and instructions. Do not talk to Me about the evil doers. For sure, they shall all drown
11|38|He built a boat. The chiefs of his nation made fun of him each time they passed by. He said, "Go ahead! Make fun of us. We, in our turn, will make fun of you like you make fun of us now
11|39|You would soon find out, who will be humiliated by the approaching torment, and upon whom will the everlasting punishment land
11|40|At last, when in response to Our orders the oven burst open, We said, "Board on it a pair of each species (of animals), your family _ except those about whom the decision has already been made _ and the believers." Only a few had believed in him
11|41|He said, "Come aboard. It is going to sail and land in the name of Allah. My Lord is really very Forgiving and very Kind
11|42|So the boat sailed with them amid waves as tall as mountains. Nooh spotted his son standing in an isolated place, and called out to him, "My son, come aboard with us! And do not be an unbeliever
11|43|(His son) said, "I will climb over this hill and be saved. This hill will protect me from the floodwater." (Nooh) said, "Today, according to the decree of Allah, there is no refuge except by His mercy." A wave shot up between the two and he was doomed to drown
11|44|An order was handed down, "Oh earth, gulp down your water, and oh sky, hold back." The command sounded, the water receded, the matter ended and the boat came to rest upon the hills of ´Jodee´. The announcement rang, "The nation of evildoers has been flung aside
11|45|Nooh called his Lord and said, "Lord! Surely, my son is my family. Your promise is absolutely true and You are absolutely the Best of the judges
11|46|(Allah) said, "Oh Nooh! He is not your family. His deeds are evil! Heed My counsel and do not be like the ignorant ones. Do not implore Me for anything you have no knowledge of
11|47|Said, "Lord, I seek refuge with You! I begged You for something I knew nothing about. I will be a loser, if You do not have mercy on me. and forgive me
11|48|He was told, "Oh Nooh, disembark in peace. Our blessings are upon you and the group with you. Among their descendants, We will bestow benefits upon many groups. Later on, We will seize (those of) them (who are disobedient) and inflict upon them a painful torture
11|49|We reveal to you these events of the (distant) unknown past. Neither you, nor your people had any knowledge of them. So endure patiently! Surely, the final outcome is for the pious
11|50|And towards ´Aads´ We sent their brother, Hood. He said, "Oh people, worship Allah (exclusively)! You do not have any other god besides Him! Your notions are just false
11|51|Oh people, I do not ask you for any reward. My reward, if any, is with my Maker. Do you then not understand
11|52|Oh people, seek your Lord´s forgiveness and turn towards Him. He will send plenty of rain for you, increase your strength and consolidate yourselves still further. Do not turn away and act like criminals
11|53|They said, "Oh Hood, you did not bring us any proof. We are not going to give up our gods merely because you say so. We are not going to believe you
11|54|We would just say that you are ill. One of our gods has seized you with an affliction!" Hood said, "I call Allah as my witness, and all of you are my witnesses, too. I am sick and blameless of all the partners you (ascribe to Allah and) worship
11|55|Other than Him! So get together, all of you! Grant me no respite! Do plan and play your tricks upon me
11|56|I trust Allah completely, my Lord and your Lord. There isn´t an animal He does not hold captive, seizing it by the lock of its hair. Indeed, (the blessing of) My Lord is upon the straight path
11|57|In case you turn away, remember that I have conveyed to you the message I was sent with. My Lord will cause another nation to take your place. You are not hurting Him a bit! My Lord keeps watch over each and every thing
11|58|When Our punishment landed, We saved Hood by Our mercy, along with those who had believed him; We saved them from an excruciating punishment
11|59|These people of ´Aad´! They rejected every proof of their Lord, the Cherisher, and defied His messengers. They followed the dictates of every obstinate tyrant
11|60|So, the curse followed them in this life as well as on the Day of Judgment. Listen to this! ´Aads´ rejected their Lord! Listen good! ´Aads´, the nation of ´Hood´ were hurled aside
11|61|Towards ´Samood´, We sent their brother Saleh. He said, "Oh my people! Worship Allah! You do not have any other god besides Him. He brought you forth from dirt and settled you on the earth. So, seek forgiveness and turn to Him in repentance. My Lord is really close by, and He responds
11|62|They said, "Oh Saleh, before this you were one of us and we had such high hopes for you. Are you trying to keep us from worshipping the deities our forefathers worshipped? We are really in doubt about your message and we hesitate to listen to you
11|63|He said, "Oh my people, what would you suggest? I have clear proofs from my Lord and He has granted me His mercy. Now, shall I defy Him? In that case who would protect me from Allah? Your suggestions can only cause me a devastating loss
11|64|Oh my people, this camel is a sign for you from Allah. Leave it alone and let it graze freely in Allah´s land. If you ever touch it with evil intentions, a calamity will befall you right away
11|65|Yet, they slaughtered it. So he said, "Enjoy your houses. You have three days! This is not a false promise
11|66|And when Our punishment approached, We protected Saleh and those who believed in him. By Our Grace, We saved them from the disgrace of that day. Your Lord is indeed very Strong and Omnipotent
11|67|A blast gripped the evildoers and flipped them flat out on their backs _ right in their homes _ in the morning
11|68|It was as if they had never lived in their houses. Listen! The Samoods rejected their Lord! Listen good! Samoods were hurled aside
11|69|And surely, Our messengers _ (Our angels) _ brought the glad tidings to Ibraheem. They said "Peace". He replied, "Peace" and rushed to serve them a roasted calf
11|70|They did not stretch their hands towards the food. When he realized this, he was worried and felt frightened in his heart. They said, "Do not be afraid, we have been sent to the nation of Loot
11|71|His wife, standing there, let out a laughter. We gave her the good news of (a son) Ishaq and after Ishaq, Yaqub
11|72|She said, "Woe to me! Will I give birth? I am old and this husband of mine is old! This would really be an odd thing
11|73|They said, "Are you incredulous of the power and authority of your Lord? The mercy and the blessings of Allah are upon you, the residents of this house! He is worthy of all praise and He is really extremely Proficient
11|74|After Ibraheem received the good news, and once the fear had left him, he began pleading with Us on behalf of the people of Loot
11|75|Ibraheem was really very mild mannered, forbearing, and soft hearted
11|76|Oh Ibraheem! Leave it! Let it be! Your Lord´s decree has arrived. An unavoidable torment will befall them
11|77|And Our angels came to Loot. Their appearance bothered and distressed him a lot and he said, "This is a terrible day
11|78|The people of his tribe came rushing towards him. Before this, too, they used to commit despicable acts. He said, "Oh my people! My daughters are here. They are holier and more befitting for you. Fear Allah and do not dishonor me before my guests! Isn´t there even a single rational person among you
11|79|They said, "Oh Loot, you have already learned that we have no interest in your daughters! You are well aware of what we desire
11|80|He said, "If only I had any power over you! If only I could turn to a formidable resource (against you)
11|81|The (angels) said, "Oh Loot! In reality, we are the angels of your Lord. These people will never get close to you! Gather your family during the night and slip away, except your wife. Whatever befalls others will strike her, too! Let no one turn around to watch the town. Dawn is their appointed time, and dawn is not far away
11|82|And when Our decree landed, We turned them upside down and rained upon them stacks of stones made of baked clay, in quick succession
11|83|These stones were marked by your Lord. The ruins (of the people of Loot) are not far away from the evildoers (living in your town)
11|84|And towards ´Madyan´ (was sent) their brother, Shoaib. He said, "Oh my people! Worship Allah! You have no other god besides Him! And do not decrease (cheat at) the measure or the scale. I see you wealthy, but I´m afraid you may be punished on that thorough day
11|85|Oh my people! Employ the measure and the scales correctly! Do not shortchange people in their goods! And do not go about spreading mischief in the land
11|86|Your savings from Allah´s grant are much better for you, if you only believe; and I am not appointed a guardian over you
11|87|They said, "Oh Shoaib, does your ´salat´ teach you that? Are you asking us to give up the deities our forefathers worshipped? Or that we should quit spending our wealth as we deem fit? Aren´t you the gentle and the rational one
11|88|He said, "Oh people! What if I really am upon a clear proof from my Lord, and what if He really has endowed me with a special gift? What would you say then? I do not want to commit that which I myself have advised you against. I want only to correct whatever I can! My good fortune (the ability to reform) is from Allah alone. Upon Him I trust and towards Him I turn
11|89|And oh People! Do not ever let your antagonism towards me impair you, lest one of the calamities _ the likes of which struck the people of Nooh, the people of Hood and the people of Saleh _ strikes you, too. And the era of the people of Loot is not far removed from that of your own
11|90|And seek forgiveness from your Lord, then turn towards Him in repentance. My Lord is really very Kind, and very Loving
11|91|They said, "Oh Shoaib! We do not understand much of what you say. However, we do find you weak among us. Had it not been for the family ties, we would have stoned you to death! You are not precious among us
11|92|Said, "Oh my people! Do you consider my family ties mightier than Allah? And have you turned your backs on Him? My Lord has definitely hemmed in around your actions from all sides (He is well aware of your actions)
11|93|Oh my people, you stay on your course of action and I will carry out my task. Soon, you will discover who turns out to be the liar, and upon whom lands the degrading punishment. So wait, I too shall wait with you
11|94|And when Our punishment arrived, We rescued Shoaib by Our mercy, and along with him the believers. A blast seized the evil doers. They were left dead, turned turtle in their homes
11|95|As if, they had never lived there! Listen good! Just like the Samoods, the Madyanese, too, were tossed away
11|96|And really, We sent Musa with Our signs and the clear proofs
11|97|Towards the pharaoh and his chiefs! But they continued to obey the dictates of the pharaoh. And the commands of the pharaoh were not well guided
11|98|On the Day of Judgment, he (the pharaoh) will lead his people; he will pilot them right into the hellfire, the worst quarters to have to enter
11|99|A curse followed them in this life, and stayed with them on the Day of Judgment! Wretched is the gift they received
11|100|We narrate to you these reports of some of the towns. Some of them are still standing, while others have long been mowed down
11|101|We did not tyrannize them! In fact, they indulged themselves unjustly. The punishment of your Lord arrived, and the gods they implored besides Allah could not protect them a bit. Rather, they only helped to enhance their ruin
11|102|Such is the severe punishment of your Lord when He seizes a town over its evil deeds. The capture by Him is very painful indeed
11|103|In it, surely, is a sign for any one who fears the punishment of the afterlife. That is the day of congregation for all people, and that is the day of testimony for all souls
11|104|We have only put it off for a brief period
11|105|On the day that is sure to come, no soul will utter a word without His permission. Some amongst them would be mournful, others jubilant
11|106|The mournful ones will be in fire, left there to moan and groan
11|107|They shall reside in it till eternity, as long as the heavens and the earth exist, unless your Lord desires something else. Your Lord definitely gets to do what He intends
11|108|And the jubilant ones will be in paradise! They will reside there till eternity _ an unceasing gift, as long as the heavens and the earth exist, unless your Lord desires something else
11|109|So, do not entertain any doubt about the deities of these people. They are merely worshipping what their forefathers had worshipped before them, and We will provide them their share of the punishment _ without any curtailment
11|110|Surely, We had awarded Musa the book; but they disputed it. Had the word from your Lord not already gone out, their dispute would have been settled. In fact, they remained in doubt and therefore, vacillated
11|111|Definitely! Your Lord will fully compensate the deeds of all of them. He is really well Aware of all their deeds
11|112|So, stay steadfast as commanded! You, along with those who have turned towards you! And do not overstep the bounds! He surely watches all your deeds
11|113|Do not rely on the evil doers, or else the fire (of hell) will torment you. Then you will not be helped. You will not have any friends besides Allah, nor will you be helped
11|114|And establish the ´Salat´ in the morning, the evening and during the night. The good deeds do, surely, nullify the bad ones! This is an exhortation for all those who are seeking advice
11|115|And be patient! Surely, Allah does not waste the reward of the pious
11|116|Why was it that the towns before you did not have people with wisdom _ except a few whom We rescued _ who could prevent the spread of mischief in the land? The evildoers persued the enjoyment of luxury and wealth. They were criminals
11|117|Your Lord is not one to destroy a town unjustly so long as its residents are righteous
11|118|Had your Lord wanted, He would have made all humans to be only one nation. They will always continue to dispute
11|119|Except those upon whom your Lord has bestowed mercy. For this reason, He created them. The word of your Lord has come to pass, "I shall definitely pack the hell with jinn and the humans, together
11|120|We narrate to you all these stories of the past messengers in order to strengthen your heart. The absolute truth has come to you! It is an exhortation and the guidance for the believers
11|121|And tell the unbelievers, "Carry on in your place, while I shall continue my task
11|122|Go ahead and wait! I, too, am waiting
11|123|All the concealed mysteries of the heavens and the earth belong to Allah. All matters _ every single one of them _ are referred to Him. So, worship Him and rely on Him! Your Lord is not unaware of your deeds
12|1|Alif, Laam, Ra; These are the verses of the clear lucid Book
12|2|Surely, We have revealed this Qur´an in Arabic so that you may understand
12|3|Through the revelations in this Qur´an, We narrate to you the best of the past events! You had no prior knowledge of these events
12|4|Once, Yusuf said to his father, "Oh my father! I had a dream. I saw eleven planets, the sun and the moon lying prostrate before me
12|5|He said, "Oh my son! Do not narrate your dream to your brothers! They might scheme and plot against you! Surely, Shaitan is the acknowledged foe of the human beings
12|6|Your Lord will choose you. He will teach you to interpret dreams and events. Thus, He will confer His blessings upon you and the family of Yaqub. In the past, too, He had conferred His blessings upon Ibraheem and Ishaq, two of your great grandparents. Your Lord, really, is the all-Knowing and the all-Wise
12|7|For the truth seekers, surely there is proof (of your prophethood) in the tale of Yusuf and his brothers. (They had demanded to hear the story of Yusuf)
12|8|Yusuf´s half-brothers said, "Our father loves Yusuf and his brother more than us, although we are a strong well-knit group! Our father is clearly misguided
12|9|Let us kill Yusuf or cast him in a distant land. Our father´s attention will then be ours, exclusively! Later we will revert, and be pious
12|10|One of them suggested, "Let us not kill Yusuf! If you must do something, let us toss him in a dried out well. Let a passing caravan pick him up and take him
12|11|They said, "Oh father, Do you not trust us concerning Yusuf? Surely, we are his well-wishers
12|12|Tomorrow, let him go with us! Let him play and enjoy! We will watch over him
12|13|(The father) said, "I am afraid you might take him out, then become unmindful of him and a wolf might devour him. That thought saddens me
12|14|They said, "A wolf will devour him? Despite the fact that we are such a strong knit group? We would be nothing but losers then
12|15|They took him out and agreed amongst themselves to leave him in a dried out well. There, We sent word to Yusuf, "Surely, one day you will describe to them this act of theirs, as they would fail to recognize you
12|16|In the evening, they returned to their father, weeping
12|17|They said, "Oh father, we were engaged in a racing competition among ourselves. We had left Yusuf to watch over our baggage and a wolf got him and devoured him! You will not believe us even though we are telling the truth
12|18|As evidence, they presented Yusuf´s shirt with fake blood on it. He said, "Rather, your conscience has made the matter easier for you! I shall bear it with the utmost patience! I seek Allah´s support regarding what you say
12|19|A passing caravan sent their water-carrier to fetch water. He lowered the pail and cried out, "Good news! It´s a boy!" They hid him in their baggage and Allah was well aware of their actions
12|20|They soon got apprehensive about Yusuf, and sold him for a paltry sum ___ a few drachmas
12|21|The one in Egypt who bought him, took him to his wife saying, "Take good care of him! He might bring us some benefits or we might adopt him as a son!" Thus, We provided a home for Yusuf in that land, so that We may teach him the interpretation of dreams and events. Allah has dominating controlis over His commands, but most people do not know
12|22|When he came of age, We granted him wisdom and knowledge. This is how We reward those who are good
12|23|Once, the lady of the house attempted to seduce him. She fastened the door and said, "Come to me!" He said, "I seek Allah´s refuge! My master has treated me very well!" Surely, the evil doers never prosper
12|24|She advanced towards him; and he would have responded, had he not witnessed clear signs from his Lord! His Lord did that in order to keep him away from a lecherous and shameful act! He was among Our sincere servants
12|25|He ran towards the door. She followed him, grabbed the back of his shirt and tore it. At the door they found her husband! She said, "How do you punish the person who covets, and casts an evil (lustful) eye upon your wife? Shouldn´t he be put behind bars or receive other painful punishment
12|26|He said, "She was the one trying to seduce me!" A witness from her family made an observation. He said, "If the front of his shirt is torn, then she is right and he is the liar
12|27|On the other hand, if the back of the shirt is torn, then he is right and she is lying
12|28|He looked at the shirt. It was torn from the back! He said (to his woman), "Surely, it was your treachery. The deception wrought by women is hard to figure
12|29|Yusuf, ignore this! Oh woman, seek forgiveness! Surely, you are the wrong doer
12|30|Gossip spread among the women of the town, "The wife of the chief is infatuated with her slave and attempted to seduce him! We think she has clearly gone astray
12|31|When she heard such sly remarks, she threw the ladies of the town a lavish party. During the party, she seated them on couches and gave each of them a knife. Then she asked Yusuf to suddenly appear before them. The ladies saw him and were stunned! Suddenly, (lost in amazement) they sliced their hands with the knife! They said, "We swear by God! This could not be a man! He has to be an honored angel
12|32|She said, "This is the one you were taunting me about! I did try to seduce him, but he got away! Now, if he fails to comply with my wishes, he will definitely land in prison and will have to face humiliation
12|33|Yusuf prayed, "Oh Lord, They are inviting me towards the shameful act, but I prefer the life of prison over it. Please Lord! If You do not turn their wicked wiles away from me, I might succumb to them! If so, I would be among the ignorant wicked ones
12|34|His Lord accepted his prayers and saved him from their evil plot. Surely, He is the One Who hears all and knows all
12|35|Despite the evidence before them, they concluded that they better send Yusuf to prison for a while
12|36|Two other young men had also landed in prison at about the same time. One of them said, "I dreamt that I was extracting wine". The other said, "I saw myself carrying bread over my head and birds were eating out of that bread! Please, interpret our dreams for us! We find you to be so pious
12|37|He said, "I will tell you the interpretation of your dreams before it is time for you to be served dinner in prison! My Lord has taught this knowledge to me! I have abandoned this (evil) nation. They do not believe in Allah, and they deny the coming of the life-to-come
12|38|I follow the ways of my forefathers: Ibraheem, Ishaq and Yaqub. It is not proper for us to associate any partners with Allah! Allah is Gracious to us and all other humans! But most people do not offer thanks
12|39|Oh my companions of prison! Isn´t one God, Allah the Omnipotent, better than several independent gods
12|40|What you worship besides Allah are merely names that you and your fore-fathers have made up! Allah has not sent down any sanction for it! Allah, alone, has the authority! He has commanded that you do not worship anyone else besides Him! This is the established permanent way! But most people do not know
12|41|Oh my comrades in prison! One of you will serve wine to his master. The other will be crucified; birds will peck the meat from his head! The matter, about which you sought my opinion has been clarified
12|42|Yusuf said to the one he thought will survive, "Tell your master about me!" But Shaitan made him forget and Yusuf stayed in prison for a few additional years
12|43|The king said, "I had a dream! I saw seven lean cows devouring seven fat ones and I saw seven green ears of corn and seven other dry ones! Oh my Courtiers, tell me the meaning of my dream, if you have any experience in dream interpretation
12|44|They said, "Dreams are nothing but scattered meaningless thoughts. We are not aware of any meaning in the dreams
12|45|After a while, Yusuf´s companion in prison __ the one who had survived __ remembered him and said, "I will tell you its meaning. First, send me on a trip (to the prison)
12|46|Oh Yusuf, the truthful, give me your opinion about this dream. Seven lean cows ate seven fat ones! And there were seven green ears of corn and seven dry ones! Hopefully, I can return to my people and inform them about the meaning of that dream
12|47|(Yusuf) said, "You will reap bumper crops for seven years. So leave the grain you harvest in its ear. Store it, except for what you need to eat
12|48|These will be followed by seven years of drought. During that time, you will use up all the grain you had stored, except what you need as seed
12|49|This will be followed by a year of pouring rain. People will press grapes to get wine
12|50|The king said, "Bring him to me!" The king´s messenger came to fetch him! (Yusuf) said, "Go back to your master and ask him, "What about the ladies who had sliced their hands. My Lord, of course, is very well Aware of their treacherous deception
12|51|The king said, "Ladies! What about it? Did you really try to seduce him?" The women said, "We swear by Allah, we did not find anything evil in him!" The chief´s woman said, "It has all come out now! The truth is, it was I who tried to seduce him! He is surely telling the truth
12|52|(Yusuf said), "Just so the truth comes out! I did not betray my master´s trust in his absence. Surely, Allah does not guide the disloyal and the faithless
12|53|I am not trying to pretend piety. The self in fact does instigate and nudge towards evil! (Its incitements are not easy to resist), except for those upon whom my Lord showers His mercy. My Lord is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
12|54|The king said, "Bring him to me. I will keep him specifically for myself!" and after conversing with him declared, "Surely today, as far as I am concerned, you are trustworthy
12|55|(Yusuf) said, "Appoint me the chief of the earth´s treasury. I have the knowledge and I am the protector
12|56|Thus, We granted Yusuf power and authority in the land. He could live anywhere he wanted! By Our Grace, We guide whom We please. We do not waste the rewards of the pious
12|57|And the reward of the afterlife is, indeed, better! It is for those who believe and are fearful (pious)
12|58|Yusuf´s brothers came to Egypt, and visited him (to receive their share of the grain); he recognized them but they could not recognize him
12|59|He prepared their baggage (with their share of grain) and said, "Next time, make sure you bring your half brother to me. Do you not notice, I fill the measure to the full, and I am a good host
12|60|You may not receive any grain, nor even come close (to me) unless you bring him along
12|61|They said, "We will surely try to induce his father (to send him along). That, of course, we will do
12|62|Yusuf asked his aides to put their barter goods back into their baggage, so that they may recognize their goods upon returning to their families. Then maybe they will return to Egypt
12|63|They returned to their father and said, "We have been refused our next share of grain. Please send our brother with us, so that we may obtain our due portion. We will surely watch over him
12|64|(Their father) said, "Shall I trust you with him now, like I trusted you with his brother earlier? Allah is the real Protector. He is absolutely the most Merciful
12|65|They unpacked their baggage and found their barter goods returned to them. They said, "Oh our father! What else do we need! These are our goods (with which we paid for the grain) returned to us! Now, we can provide for our family! We will watch over our half-brother and increase our share by a camel load of grain. This load of camel is really easy for us
12|66|(The father) said, "I will not send him along, unless you give me your solemn word _ sworn in the name of Allah as your witness _ that you will bring him back to me, unless you are ambushed. When they gave him a firm assurance, he said, "Allah is the witness over what you say
12|67|And he said, "Oh my sons! Don´t you all enter the town through one gate, but rather go through different ones. I cannot protect you a bit against Allah. The authority belongs solely to Allah! I trust Him! All trusting persons should place their trust in Him
12|68|They went into town passing through different gates, as instructed by their father. That could not have protected them against Allah a bit, but this is how Yaqub felt in his heart. So he chose to satisfy himself. He had the knowledge given by Us, but most people do not know
12|69|They came to Yusuf. He pulled his brother close to him and said, "I am your brother. Do not grieve over what they have done
12|70|Then, as he packed their luggage for departure, he hid the peg in his brother´s baggage. (When the caravan departed), the announcer called, "Oh you people of the caravan! You are thieves
12|71|They came forward and asked, "What have you lost
12|72|The king´s peg is missing!" they said, "A reward of a camel load of grain has been announced (for its recovery). We are the guarantors of that peg
12|73|They said, "By Allah, you know us. We have not come to make trouble in the land! We are not thieves
12|74|He said, "So what should be the punishment of the thief, if you are lying
12|75|They said, "He, in whose baggage the stolen goods is found, should be arrested and kept along with the goods. That is how we punish the transgressors
12|76|First, he searched the baggage of others. Then came to his brother and produced it (peg) from his baggage! Thus, We played a trick on them, and found an excuse for Yusuf. The law of the king did not allow Yusuf to keep his brother! We elevate in status, whomever We please! And over all those with knowledge, there is the One Who is the all-Knowing
12|77|They said, "He is not alone! His brother, too, had committed a theft earlier." Yusuf swallowed that remark and disclosed nothing. In his heart, he said, "You are indeed, of an evil status! And Allah knows what you describe
12|78|They said, "Oh chief, his father is really very old. Keep one of us in his stead! We find you to be a kind hearted person
12|79|Said, "May Allah help us! We can only keep the one, in whose baggage we found the stolen goods. We may not keep any one else! Otherwise, we will be the transgressors
12|80|They failed to convince Yusuf, and consulted each other. The oldest brother said (to others), "Do you not know? Father had obtained a firm oath upon Allah from you. And earlier, in Yusuf´s case, you had been neglectful. I will not leave this place until my father permits me, or until Allah decides my fate. He is the Best of the judges
12|81|Go back to your father and tell him, "Oh father, your son committed a theft. We say only what we know, and we could not have foreseen the future! We could not protect him from the unseen
12|82|Ask the people of the town we were in, or others in our caravan. We are telling the truth
12|83|(The father) said, "Rather, your evil spirits made it easier for you (to say that)! I will bear with patience, the utmost patience! Allah might still bring both of my sons back to me. Surely, He is the All-knower and the All-wise
12|84|He turned away from them and said, "Alas! Poor Yusuf!" He tried to hide his feelings, but his eyes turned white with grief
12|85|They said, "By Allah, you would never quit talking about Yusuf, until you either die or melt away
12|86|Said, "I complain only to Allah about my grief and anxiety. I know that about Allah, which you do not know
12|87|Oh my sons! Go look for Yusuf and his brother. Do not give up hope. Have faith in the mercy of Allah. Surely, only the disbelievers lose hope in the mercy of Allah
12|88|When they visited Yusuf again, they said, "Oh Chief, we and our families have come upon some hard times. We have brought our humble assets. Please be charitable and let us have the full measure of grain. Allah, surely, rewards those who are charitable
12|89|He said, "Now do you realize what you had done to Yusuf and his brother in your ignorance, earlier
12|90|They asked, "Are you really Yusuf?" Said, "I am. And this is my brother! Allah has bestowed favors upon us. Surely, Allah does not waste the reward of the pious, those who fear Him and remain steadfast
12|91|They remarked, "We swear by Allah! He chose you over us. We were clearly the wrong-doers
12|92|(Yusuf) said, "There is no censure, today. Allah will forgive you. And He is absolutely the most Forgiving of all
12|93|Take this shirt of mine and place it over my father´s eyes! It will bring back his sight! And bring all your families to me
12|94|And when the caravan moved (from Egypt) their father said, "Call me senile, but I am beginning to smell the scent of Yusuf
12|95|They said, "By Allah, you are still obsessed by that same old thing
12|96|The bearer of good news arrived and placed the shirt over his face. His sight was restored forthwith. Said, "Did I not tell you? I know that about Allah, which you do not know
12|97|They said, "Oh our father, pray for our forgiveness. We surely, are the sinners
12|98|Said, "I will ask my Lord to forgive you. He is really the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
12|99|When they came to Yusuf, he raised his parents to the throne with him, saying, "Welcome to Egypt, God willing, in peace
12|100|He helped his parents up to the throne with him; and they all fell down prostrate before him! He said, "Oh Father! This is what I saw in my dream earlier. My Lord has made it all come true. He blessed me, when He took me out of prison, and again when He brought all of you to me from the village, even though Shaitan had sowed discord between me and my brothers. Surely, my Lord is extremely kind to whomever He pleases, and surely, He is the All-knower and the Wise
12|101|My Lord! You have awarded me kingdom and have taught me the meaning of (dreams and) events. Oh Maker of the heavens and the earth, You are our Patron in this world, as well as in the afterlife. Give me the death of a Muslim, and let me join the pious
12|102|These are the events of the unseen distant past which We reveal to you (oh Mohammed)!. Certainly, you were not present among them, when they were in accord and were plotting and scheming
12|103|Most people will not believe, no matter how hard you try
12|104|Do you ask them for anything in return? This (Qur´an) is, in fact, a reminder and an advice for the entire world
12|105|There are so many signs in the heavens and the earth. They pass by them without paying any attention
12|106|Most of them do believe in Allah, but then they associate partners with Him
12|107|Do they now feel secure from the overwhelming punishment of Allah, or the hour (of Judgment). It may descend upon them suddenly, when they least expect it
12|108|Say, "This is my way. It is with proofs and evidences! I, as well as those who follow me, call you towards Allah. He is the most High! I would never commit the sin of shirk (associating partners with Allah)
12|109|Even prior to you, We sent men from among the townsfolk towards them. To these men, We sent revelations. Have they not moved about in the land and seen the fateful end of those before them? The abode of the afterlife is far superior, and it is for those who are fearful (pious)! So, do they not think
12|110|Take heart! Our help arrived just as the messengers were beginning to lose hope and (their opponent) thought that they had been lied to (by the messengers)! We rescued whom We pleased! Our punishment will never be warded off from the criminal nation
12|111|Surely, for those who are wise there is a moral in this tale. It is not a made-up story! The book that exists with them confirms it in all its details. And in it is guidance and mercy for any nation that believes
13|1|Alif, Laam, Meem, Ra. These verses of the book are the absolute truth revealed to you by your Lord. But most people do not believe
13|2|It is Allah Who raised the heavens without any pillars, as you can see. Then, He mounted the throne and tamed the sun and the moon _ each is in motion for a specified time. He conducts His affairs and He explains His signs. Perhaps you will acknowledge the scheduled meeting with your Lord
13|3|He spread out the earth, and laid upon it mountains and rivers. He made fruits of all kinds in pairs, and He wrapped the day over the night. Surely, these are all signs for a pondering nation
13|4|There are adjoining tracts of lands on earth containing fields, date-trees _ some with forked trunks _ and grape orchards. The same water irrigates them all. Yet, We excelled some over others in taste and nutrition. That surely is a sign for a thinking nation
13|5|Be amazed if you must, at their question, "After we have become dust, would we be created anew?" They are the ones who have rejected their Lord! They have shackles round their necks and they are the inmates of (hell) fire! They shall live in it for ever
13|6|They hasten to seek the bad before the good. The likes of them have gone by earlier. Indeed, your Lord forgives people despite their sins! Indeed, your Lord is very Stern when He punishes
13|7|The unbelievers say, "Why did a sign from his Lord not accompany him?" You are truly a warner for them! There is always a guide for every generation
13|8|Allah is Aware of every pregnant female, that which she carries, and that which her uterus draws off and supplies. He has all things in perfect proportions
13|9|He knows all things, manifest as well as mysterious and unseen. He is the Mightiest and the most High
13|10|It is the same for Him whether you whisper or shout out loud, hide in the dead of night or walk in broad daylight
13|11|By the orders of Allah, the guardian angels accord protection. They keep watch in front of and behind everyone. Surely, Allah does not alter the fate of a nation till they change their own selves. If Allah intends evil for a people, there is no escape from it. They have no guardian besides Allah
13|12|It is He Who shows you the lightning, and you observe it with fear and anticipation. He initiates the clouds heavy with rain
13|13|Out of fear, the angels sing His praises, and so does thunder. With a bolt of lightning, He stupefies whomever He wants. Yet, they quarrel about Allah! He is extremely Powerful
13|14|To call (and implore) Him is the real prayer. _ (To be prayed to, is His exclusive right). Those others they implore besides Him could never respond! They are like the one stretching his hands towards water, wishing it to enter his mouth. It never can! The prayers of the unbelievers will only go to waste
13|15|Everything in the heavens and on earth falls prostrate before Allah _ willing or not! So do all shadows, every morning and evening
13|16|Ask them, "Who sustains the heavens and the earth?" Say, "Allah!" Say, "Do your patrons _ those you accept besides Him _ have any ability to benefit or harm even their own selves?" Say, "Is a blind man comparable to the one with eyes? Are darkness and daylight equal? Have others, like the partners you ascribe to Allah, created anything that matches His creations? Is that the doubt?" Say, "Allah alone is the Creator of all things! He is the One and Only, and He is the Omnipotent
13|17|The rainwater He sends down fills the drains to their capacity. The rushing water carries the froth on top. When purified over fire, the jewelry and other fineries also yield froth. Allah illustrates the truth and falsehood with these examples! The froth gets discarded, while that which is useful stays behind to serve the earth! In this manner Allah cites the parables
13|18|The happy ending is for those who respond to their Lord! Those who do not, would be ready to pay as ransom the entire wealth of this world, and even twice as much if it was theirs! Their reckoning will be stringent, and hell would be their home _ a horrendous place
13|19|So! Can those accepting the absolute truth revealed to you by your Lord be like the blind? Surely only the rational ones pay heed
13|20|Those who fulfill their pledge with Allah and do not break their covenant
13|21|Those who establish that which Allah has enjoined, fear Allah and are afraid of the stringent reckoning
13|22|Those who remain steadfast, seek the pleasure of their Lord, establish ´salat´ and out of Our grant give charity _ openly as well as in secret. The eventual success is theirs! They get rid of their sins by their righteous deeds
13|23|They will enter the eternal paradise, and so will the righteous among their forefathers, children and wives. Angels will come to serve them from every door
13|24|(Angels will say) ´Peace upon you´, in return for your patience. The final outcome, par excellance, is yours
13|25|Cursed are those who enter into a pact, and then violate their pledges, those spreading mischief in the land, and those severing the relationship Allah has enjoined. Theirs is the worst abode
13|26|Allah extends or limits the provisions, for whomever He pleases. They are contented with the life of this world. Compared to the afterlife, this life is just a brief comfort
13|27|The unbelievers say, "Why did his Lord not send down a sign with him?" Say, "Allah leads astray whomever He wants, and He guides those who heed
13|28|The believers find solace in the remembrance of Allah. Listen good! Hearts obtain solace with the remembrance of Allah
13|29|The title of honor and an exquisite abode belong to those who believe and do righteous acts
13|30|Generations before them have passed like that. To this generation We sent you! So you may recite Our revelations to them. They have disavowed the most Merciful! Say, "He is my Lord. There is no god except Him! In Him do I trust! And towards Him is my return
13|31|What if the mountains move about, the earth rips open and the dead begin talking? What if the Quran were to cause all that? (They would still not believe). Indeed, the power and prerogative of all sorts belong to Allah! Do the believers not feel reassured by the fact that Allah, if He had wanted, could bestow guidance upon all people. As a consequence of their lies, calamity would continue to hit them in their homes, or strike nearby, till the day of His promise. Surely, Allah does not renege on His promise
13|32|Many messengers were mocked prior to you. I allowed the unbelievers some respite; then I seized them. How terrible was My punishment
13|33|They appoint partners for Allah, even though He is the vigilant Guardian over every soul´s deeds! Say, "Name them! Are you just blurting things out or do you, on His earth, know something that even Allah does not? The deceptions of the disbelievers are made to appear delightful for them. Such deceptions keep them away from the straight path! No body can guide those whom Allah leads astray
13|34|They will be punished in the life of this world; and the torture of the afterlife is more severe! They have no helpers against Allah´s wrath
13|35|The paradise being promised to the righteous has rivers flowing right through it. Its food and shades are eternal! Such is the reward for the righteous, and the retribution for the unbelievers is fire
13|36|The people of the book are pleased about what is revealed to you. However, groups of them dispute portions of it. Say, "My orders are to worship Allah exclusively, and not join partners with Him. Towards Him I call you, and towards Him is my return journey
13|37|Thus, We have sent down this order in Arabic. After this revelation, if you allow any adjustment for their whims, you will find no rescuers or protectors against Allah
13|38|Indeed, prior to you We sent messengers who also had wives and children. No messenger can perform miracles of his own accord _ without the will of Allah. Each age has its own preordained destiny
13|39|Allah abolishes, and confirms, what He wants! He has the real authority
13|40|You (oh Mohammed, SAW) may witness how We punish them, or We may let you die first. Either way, conveying the message is your obligation, calling them to account is Ours
13|41|Have they not observed? We are consistently shrinking the land from all sides. Allah´s is the final command. There is no overseer above Him and His reckoning is swift
13|42|The nations before them tried to be cunning. Ingenuity of all sorts belongs to Allah! He knows exactly the deed each soul has gathered. The unbelievers will soon realize who triumphs in the final outcome
13|43|The unbelievers are saying, "You are not the messenger." Tell them, "The testimony of Allah, or anybody with the knowledge of the book, is enough to settle this issue between you and me
14|1|Alif, Laam, Ra. We revealed to you this book, so that by the will of Allah, you may lead people out of darkness into light, towards the path of the most Powerful and the Praiseworthy
14|2|To Allah belongs everything in the heavens and on earth, and for the unbelievers, there is an affliction of the worst severity
14|3|Those who love the life of this world more than that of the life-to-come, place obstacles in the path of Allah. They look for twists to deviate from it. They have strayed far away from the path
14|4|We have always sent messengers who were proficient in the language of their people, so they could explain the matter clearly. Allah guides or leads astray whomever He pleases. He is the most Powerful, the Wisest
14|5|We surely sent Musa with Our signs, commanding, "Lead your people out of darkness, and into light. Remind them of the blessings of Allah. Surely, in it are alerting signs for the grateful and the steadfast
14|6|And Musa said to his people, "Do you recall the blessings of Allah? He liberated you from the tortures of the pharaohs. They inflicted horrid suffering upon you when they slaughtered your sons and let your womenfolk live! That was, indeed, a gruesome trial from your Mighty Lord
14|7|And your Lord proclaimed, "If you are grateful, I will grant you much more. Should you be ungrateful, My retribution is very severe, indeed
14|8|And Musa said, "What if you express ingratitude, you and everyone else in the world together? Even then, Allah is Free of all wants; He is Praise-worthy
14|9|Have you not heard the tales of those gone by __ the people of Nooh, Aads, Samoods, and others after them? Now, no one knows them except Allah. The messengers brought them clear proofs! But they shoved their hands in the messengers´ mouths, _ (forbade them to speak) _ and said, "Here! We reject what you were sent with. We are reluctant and skeptical about your message
14|10|The messengers replied, "Do you have misgivings about Allah, Who is the Creator of the heavens and the earth? He offers to forgive your sins and to grant you an extension for a prescribed period." They said, "You are only humans like us, and you intend to turn us away from the deities our parents worshipped. Bring us a convincing miracle first
14|11|The messengers said to them "Of course, we are humans like you! But Allah confers His blessings upon such of His servants as He chooses! Without the will of Allah, we cannot bring you any miracles! The believers should bestow their trust in Allah
14|12|And why must we not place our trust in Allah, when He has already shown us our paths? With patience, we shall bear any suffering You inflict upon us. In Allah alone, must the believers bestow their trust
14|13|The unbelievers said to the messengers, "We would certainly drive you out of the land, unless you return to the folds of our religion." Their Lord disclosed to them (the messengers), "We will, surely wipe out the evildoers
14|14|In their place, We will settle you in the land. This is for those who fear Our reckoning and heed Our warning
14|15|They sought the decision, and every obstinate oppressor lost out
14|16|Hell lies in wait for such ones! There, to drink he shall have pus-filled discharge from wounds
14|17|With difficulty he will sip it, and with trouble he will manage to swallow it down. Death shall accost him from all sides, but die he shall not! Yet another tough torment shall lie in wait for him
14|18|Those, who reject their Lord, shall not benefit from any of their deeds. Their deeds are like ashes, being blown away by strong winds on a stormy day. Theirs is the blunder of the worst kind
14|19|Do they not see that Allah created the heavens and the earth with perfection? If He wants, He can make you extinct and replace you with a different creation
14|20|That is not at all difficult for Allah
14|21|When all of them together appear before Allah, the weak among them shall say to those who had been considered great, "We used to follow you! So, now can you offer any protection against Allah´s wrath at all." They shall reply, "Had Allah guided us, we would have guided you. It is the same for us now, whether we worry or stay calm. There is no escape for us, now
14|22|Once it is all over (on the judgment day), Shaitan will say, "Allah gave you a pledge. His promise was real and came true. I too pledged, but I deserted and failed you! I had no hold over you. I merely proposed and you accepted. So, now, condemn yourself and not me. I cannot respond to your screams for help, nor can you heed my cry for aid. I deny your act of associating me with Allah." For the evildoers, there is a painful punishment
14|23|And those who believe and do good deeds would be ushered into paradise. Rivers run right through it. Their Lord willing, they would live in it forever! In it, they would be greeted with salutes of ´peace´
14|24|Do you not see how Allah strikes the parable of the ´kalima tayyaba´ (the noble words)? It resembles the healthy tree, with roots firmly planted and branches reaching the sky
14|25|By the Lord´s will, it bears fruit all the time! Allah quotes this example, so that people may understand
14|26|And the parable of the evil words is like a repulsive diseased tree. It is uprooted from the land and has no stability
14|27|With this firm statement, Allah strengthens the believers in this world and in the afterlife. He leads the transgressors astray. Allah does what He wills
14|28|Did you not see those who treated the blessings of Allah with ingratitude and landed their people in the house of ruin
14|29|The hell, which they will enter, is the worst dwelling
14|30|They invent partners for Allah, in order to throw others off the course. Say, "Enjoy yourself! For surely, you will proceed forth right into the fire
14|31|Convey My instructions to those of My servants who believe, that they should establish ´salat´ and give charity __ openly and in secret __ out of what We have granted them, before the day arrives when neither trade nor friendship will avail
14|32|Allah is the Creator of the heavens and the earth. He sends rain from the sky. With that water, He brings out the produce for you to eat. He ordered the ships to submit to you! With His commands, they sail across the seas! He also tamed the rivers for you
14|33|And for you, He tamed the sun and the moon; they are forever on course. He subjected the night and the day to benefit you
14|34|He granted you whatever you asked for. His blessings upon you are so numerous, they are incalculable! Man, indeed, is ungrateful and unjust
14|35|And Ibraheem said, "My Lord, make this town (Makkah) peaceful and secure, and steer me and my progeny away from idol-worship
14|36|My lord, these idols have driven a lot of people astray. Surely, whoever obeys me is my follower. However, if anyone disobeys me, then indeed, You are the most Kind and the most Forgiving
14|37|Oh our Lord! Surely, I have settled my family close to Your sanctified house, in a barren valley devoid of all cultivation, in order that they establish ´salat´. Oh our Lord, make their hearts lean towards it, and provide them Your bounties so they may express their gratitude
14|38|Surely, our Lord, You are aware of what we conceal as well as what we declare! And nothing is ever hidden _ whether in the heavens or on earth _ from Allah
14|39|All praise is for Allah, Who gave me (two sons) Ismail and Ishaq, despite my old age. Surely, my Lord hears the supplication
14|40|Oh my Lord, make me and my family firm on ´salat´, and oh my Lord, accept my prayers
14|41|Oh my Lord! Forgive me, my parents and all believers on the day the final accounting will be held
14|42|Do not even pause to consider that Allah could be unmindful of what the evil ones are doing. He only postpones their fate till the day when their eyes will be glazed and fixed
14|43|Holding their heads high, running scared, _ their eyes popping out of their sockets _ they will be frightened out of their wits
14|44|And (Oh Mohammed, SAW) alert the people about that day when the punishment will land on them. At that time, the evildoers will say, "Oh our Lord, allow us just a little more time! We promise to heed Your call and obey the messengers." ... (what)? ... "You used to swear, did you not, that you will never have to contend with any adversity
14|45|You inhabit the locality of those people (of the previous age) who had harmed their own selves. It should be amply clear to you how We dealt with them. We have cited you their examples
14|46|They played their tricks! But Allah had an answer to all their tricks. Their tricks were so effective. Mountains could vanish by their tricks
14|47|Do not even doubt that Allah can ever breach His promise with the messengers. Indeed, Allah is Exalted in Power, the Lord of Revenge
14|48|That day, the earth will be transformed into something altogether different. So will the heavens. And every one will appear before Allah, the Conqueror, and the only One
14|49|That day, you will see the criminals, bound up in shackles and chains
14|50|Their shirts will consist of molten tar, and fire will wrap their faces
14|51|So that Allah may duly compensate each soul! And Allah is very swift in calling to accounts
14|52|This is the message for the people, so that they may come to know. So that they may be forewarned that God is only One, and so that the sensible ones may heed the advice
15|1|Alif, Laam, Ra. These are the verses of the book, a clear lucid Qur´an
15|2|There will come a time when the unbelievers would look back and yearn to have lived as obedient ones
15|3|So leave them alone. Let them eat and enjoy! Let their hopes distract and perplex them. They will soon come to know
15|4|We never destroy any locality except in accordance with a preordained scheme and time-plan
15|5|No generation shall hasten or delay the term fixed for it
15|6|They (the unbelievers) said, "Oh you, upon whom this reminder is revealed! You are really insane
15|7|Wouldn´t you have come to us with angels, had you been truthful
15|8|We dispatch the angels only with the final judgment. In that case, they would have no respite
15|9|Indeed it is We Who revealed this Qur´an, and of course We are its guardian
15|10|Indeed, prior to you too, We sent (messengers) __ even to ancient tribes
15|11|They mocked every messenger that ever came to them
15|12|Thus We let this (mockery) pass through the hearts of the criminals
15|13|They do not believe! This has been the tradition of their ancestors
15|14|Even if We were to fling open a door in the sky, and they were actually climbing up through it
15|15|They would say, "Our sights fail us, we are drugged. Rather, we are a nation bewitched
15|16|And surely, We created fortified spheres in the sky, and for the viewers We decorated it
15|17|And We have secured it against every cursed Shaitan
15|18|Occasionally, one of them eavesdrops, and a bright blazing meteor streaks after him
15|19|We spread out the land and pitched mountains on it, firm and immovable. In the land, We grew all kinds of things in a perfect balance
15|20|Out of the land, We provide livelihood for you, and other creations, too. You are not their providers
15|21|We have all things in infinite quantities. We mete them out in measured amounts
15|22|We circulate the winds full of moisture. We send rain down from the sky, and We have you drink that water. You could not hold that (much water) in reservoirs
15|23|We, indeed, grant life as well as death! And We are the (ultimate) Receiver and Inheritor
15|24|We surely know those who have gone by before you, just as We know those who have yet to come
15|25|Your Lord will, indeed, gather them all. Verily, He is the Wisest and all-Knowing
15|26|Surely, We have molded the humans from the dried-out stinking clay
15|27|And We had earlier fashioned jinn from a hot sultry flame
15|28|Your Lord said to the angels, "I am going to bring a man into existence from the dried-out stinking clay
15|29|When I put him in order and breathe my spirit into him, you must fall prostrate before him
15|30|The angels fell prostrate! All of them
15|31|Except Ibleees! He refused to be among those who fell prostrate
15|32|(Allah) said, "Oh Iblees! What is the matter? Why did you not fall prostrate
15|33|He said, "I am not the one to prostrate myself before a man! You have fashioned him from the dried-out stinking clay
15|34|(Allah) said, "Get out of here! You, surely, are damned
15|35|Curse will loom over you till the Day of Judgment
15|36|He (Iblees) said, "Oh my Lord, grant me a moratorium till the day You raise them again
15|37|(Allah) said, "you have been granted the stay
15|38|Till that appointed day
15|39|(Iblees) said, "My Lord, since You led me astray, I will definitely embellish the allure of this world for them. I will fascinate and entice them all away
15|40|Except the sincere ones among Your servants
15|41|(Allah) said, "This Qur´an is, indeed, the path straight towards Me
15|42|You shall have no hold over My servants except those who follow you and stray from the path
15|43|And verily, hell is the promised place for them all
15|44|It has seven gates, each for a different class of sinners
15|45|The pious shall be in paradise, amid its fountains
15|46|(They shall be told to) enter it in peace and security
15|47|We will rid their hearts of the residual rancor and resentment. Seated on couches and facing each other, they will live there like brothers
15|48|There, they will encounter no hardship, and they will never be asked to leave
15|49|(Oh Mohammed, SAW), inform My servants that I am the most Forgiving. Indeed, I am the most Kind
15|50|The punishment I inflict is really very painful
15|51|And inform them about Ibraheem´s guests
15|52|They came to him and said, "Peace!" He said, "We feel afraid of you
15|53|They said, "Don´t be afraid! In fact, we give you the good news of a son endowed with wisdom
15|54|Do you give me this news even though I have attained an old age? What kind of good news is that
15|55|They said, "We bring you this good news with certainty. So, do not be pessimistic
15|56|He (Ibraheem) said, "Only the misguided abandon hope in the mercy of their Lord
15|57|Said, "What is your mission, Oh angels
15|58|They said, "We have been dispatched towards a nation of criminals
15|59|Other than the family of Loot. For, we will rescue them all
15|60|With the exception of his wife who, it is decreed, will be among those who shall lag behind
15|61|And when they came to visit the family of Loot
15|62|He (Loot) said, "You appear to be strangers here
15|63|They replied, "Rather, we come to accomplish that about which they were in doubt
15|64|We bring you the infallible certainty! What we say is really the truth
15|65|Let your family slip away under the cover of darkness. You follow them closely and let none of you glance back! Continue on towards the directed spot
15|66|We conveyed to him Our decision that by dawn those people will be completely annihilated
15|67|The people of the town came (to Loot) rejoicing
15|68|He said, "They are my guests. Do not disgrace me
15|69|Fear Allah and do not humiliate me
15|70|They said, "Did we not forbid you to stand up for the whole world
15|71|He said, "Here are my daughters. If you follow my advice
15|72|(I swear) upon your life, (oh Mohammed, SAW) they were intoxicated _ rampaging and out of control
15|73|So at the crack of dawn, a blast grabbed them
15|74|We flipped them upside down! We rained upon them stones made of baked clay
15|75|Herein are the signs for those who scrutinize closely
15|76|That town happens to be located along a main thoroughfare
15|77|In this are signs for the believers
15|78|And the people (living in the town) of ´Aika´ were evildoers
15|79|We breathed vengeance upon them. Those (two settlements) existed on the main travel routes
15|80|The people of (the town) of ´Hijr´ too, had rejected the messengers
15|81|We sent the messengers with Our signs, but they ignored
15|82|They used to carve safe and secure homes in the mountains
15|83|A mighty blast grabbed them in the morning
15|84|None of what they used to gain and gather could offer them any security or protection
15|85|We created the heavens and the earth, and all else in between, with a specific purpose! The hour (of Judgment) is sure to arrive! So, forgive and forget with grace
15|86|Surely, your Lord is the Omniscient, the ingenious Creator
15|87|We have bestowed seven verses upon you, (the Surah Fatiha), worthy of being recited repeatedly, and the Majestic Qur´an
15|88|Do not covet the temporary enjoyment We have bestowed upon certain groups of them. Do not grieve for them. Rather, be considerate to the believers
15|89|Tell them, "I am truly an obvious warner for you
15|90|Like the one We sent to those who split into groups
15|91|Those who separated the Qur´an into fragments
15|92|By your Lord! We will definitely call them all to accounts
15|93|About what they used to do
15|94|So, proclaim as commanded, and ignore the idol worshippers
15|95|We are more than sufficient against those who scoff
15|96|Those assigning other gods besides Allah will soon come to know
15|97|Of course, We know that their remarks sting your heart
15|98|Chant the praises of your Lord! Be among those who fall prostrate
15|99|And remain obedient to your Lord, right until your death
16|1|Allah´s decree is here! But do not scramble towards it! Exalted is He! Far above all those they associate with Him
16|2|He sends the angels, and through them reveals His command to His servant _ whomever He chooses _ that there is no god except Me! So, fear Me
16|3|He created the heavens and the earth with a purpose. He is far above all (false gods) they associate with Him
16|4|He created man from a drop of fluid. Yet, man is now hostile and argumentative
16|5|He created the cattle for you! Warmth and other benefits in them exist for you; you also eat their meat
16|6|In your cattle, you have a sense of an aesthetic grace; you herd them home at sundown; at dawn you bring them out to graze
16|7|They carry your burden from town to town, something you could not otherwise do except with the greatest of effort. Indeed, your Lord is the most Gracious and the most Merciful
16|8|The horse, the mule and the donkey are adornments, and also for you to ride. He creates other things about which you do not even know
16|9|The straight path leads to Allah. Other ways deviate from it. Had Allah willed, He could have guided them all (to the straight path)
16|10|He is the One Who sends rain down from the sky. That water you drink, and it grows trees from which you secure forage
16|11|With that (water) He grows crops for you; and orchards of olives, dates and grapes and all kinds of fruit. Surely, there are signs in it for a people that ponder
16|12|For you He tamed the night and the day, as well as the sun and the moon! And by His command the stars are brought under control. Surely, there are signs in it for those who think
16|13|(He created) many things of different kinds for you and dispersed them in the land. There are signs in it for any nation that pays attention
16|14|He is the One Who subdued the sea, so that you acquire fresh meat (seafood) to eat, and extract pearls to wear. And you find ships ploughing through it. Thus you seek His blessings! So that you may be grateful
16|15|He pitched mountains on the earth _ lest it sways; and He cut rivers and paths on it, so that you may find your way
16|16|(There are) many indications! They make use of the stars, too, to navigate
16|17|So then, can the One Who creates be equal to the one who does not? Do you, then, not pay attention
16|18|If you count the blessings of Allah, you can never enumerate them all! Undoubtedly Allah is Forgiving, the most Merciful
16|19|Allah knows whatever you conceal, and whatever you reveal
16|20|The others they pray to, besides Allah, create nothing. Rather, they are themselves created
16|21|They are lifeless, not alive! They have no idea when they will be resurrected
16|22|Your God is only One God. Those who do not believe in the life-to-come are arrogant. Their hearts are steeped in denial
16|23|No doubt at all! Allah knows what they conceal, and what they reveal! He certainly, does not like the arrogant ones
16|24|When asked, ´What did your Lord reveal?´ they say, "(These are) tales of those gone by
16|25|On the Day of Judgment, they shall carry the entire load of their own sins, as well as the sins of others __ the ones they led astray without knowing. Beware! Very heavy, indeed, is the burden they carry
16|26|Before them, too, people tried deception and trickery. Allah finished off their edifice from its very foundation. The roof caved in upon them. Punishment came to them from where they least expected
16|27|He will disgrace them on the Day of Judgment and will say to them, "Now, where are the ones you had appointed as My partners? On their behalf, you used to argue! And those with knowledge will cry out, "Surely, today, only shame and disgrace are for the unbelievers
16|28|The angels shall proceed to seize their souls. They __ those who had harmed themselves __ will attempt to strike peace, and will say, "We were not doing anything evil!" .... (Really)? .... "Of course, you were! Allah knows very well what you used to do
16|29|Now, enter hell through its gates, to live there forever!" Surely, wretched is the abode for the haughty
16|30|And when the righteous are asked, "What has your Lord revealed?" They say, "Excellent!" For those who do good deeds, there are advantages in this life and their abode in the life-to-come is far superior! What an exquisite home exists for the pious
16|31|An eternal paradise! Rivers run right through it! There, anything they desire shall be theirs. That is how Allah rewards the pious
16|32|The angels will take possession of their souls in a state of purity and will say to them, "Peace upon you! Enter the paradise as a reward for what you used to do
16|33|Are they (evildoers) waiting for the angels to visit them? Or for Allah´s decree to come crashing down on them? Other folks before them did just that! Allah did not victimize them wrongfully. Rather, they used to treat their own selves unjustly
16|34|The evil of their own deeds struck them down. Their acts of ridiculing and mocking (the truth) engulfed them
16|35|Those guilty of ´shirk´ (ascribing partners to Allah) said, "Unless Allah had so willed, we would not worship anyone else besides Him. Nor would our ancestors. We could not have sanctified anything else other than Him." Those others before them said that too! Is there any (obligation) upon the messengers, except to convey the message distinctly
16|36|Surely We raised into every people, messengers who exhorted them to worship Allah and to avoid false gods. Among the people were those whom Allah guided, while waywardness became the lot of others. Move about in the land and observe the demise of those who denied
16|37|You may desire guidance for them, but Allah does not show the way to anyone He has already led astray. They have no allies
16|38|They swear by Allah a lot, claiming emphatically that Allah will not bring the dead back to life. On the contrary, though most people do not understand, this is the promise incumbent upon Him
16|39|(Allah will fulfill His promise) in order to clarify the matter for those who dispute, and so that the unbelievers would realize that, for sure, they are the liars
16|40|Indeed, when We intend for anything to happen, We need only to express and say to it, ´Be´ and it happens
16|41|Allah will provide nicer homes to those who __ because they are oppressed for the sake of Allah __ leave their homes and emigrate. This (He will do) in this life, and the reward in the afterlife is far superior! If only they realize
16|42|(It is for) those who are patient, and place their trust in their Lord
16|43|Prior to you, too, We appointed men and sent revelations to them. If you do not know, ask the people of the scriptures
16|44|(We sent) clear proofs and the scriptures. Now, We have sent you this reminder (Qur´an) so that you may demonstrate the revelations to them. Perhaps they may reflect and ponder
16|45|While playing their dirty tricks, do they not worry that Allah might make the ground swallow them, or that the punishment may pounce on them from an unexpected source
16|46|And grab them while they are bustling with activity? They cannot thwart (Allah´s designs)
16|47|Or seize them first with terror, then grab them as they dread? Yet, your Lord is most Forgiving and most Beneficent, indeed
16|48|Do they not observe all the things Allah has created? Their shadows shift from right to left, falling prostrate before Allah, and recognizing their meagerness and infirmity
16|49|All those in the heavens and the earth __ angels and animals, alike __ fall prostrate before Allah! They are not arrogant
16|50|They fear their Lord above, and they carry out their orders
16|51|And Allah proclaimed, "Do not accept two gods! Indeed, He is the only One God! So fear Me alone
16|52|Everything in the heavens and the earth belongs to Him. This is the permanent lasting religion! Will they then, fear those other than Allah
16|53|Every benefit you enjoy is from Allah, and when a calamity befalls, you implore Him
16|54|And when He eases your distress, a group among you commits ´shirk´ (associates partners with Allah)
16|55|For the blessings of Allah they show ingratitude. So, have fun! Soon, you will know (your folly)
16|56|Out of the bounties Allah has provided, they allot a portion for those, about whom they know nothing! (I swear) by Allah! They will very definitely be asked about the lies they invent
16|57|For Allah they imagine daughters. Exalted is He! And for themselves (sons), which they prefer
16|58|Just break the good news of a daughter to any one of them. His face darkens with dismay, and he struggles to hide (his feelings)
16|59|He hides this fact from his people and wonders, "Should he bear the shame in public? Or perhaps he should bury (the infant girl) in the ground?" Evil is what they decide
16|60|Wicked are the attributes of those who do not believe in the afterlife. Allah´s attributes are sublime! He is the Powerful, the Wisest
16|61|If Allah were to punish people for (all) their evil deeds (in this life), no one would be left with any life (on this planet). But, for a determined time, He has postponed the final judgment. Once that time comes, no stay shall be allowed __ not even for an hour
16|62|To Allah they assign that which they despise for themselves. They utter lies, that theirs would be all the good things. No doubt at all! Fire is for them, and they will enter it ahead of all others
16|63|By Allah, surely, We also sent messengers to the nations before you (Oh Mohammed, SAW). Shaitan, however, made their deeds appear adorable to them. Today too, he is their friend and theirs is the painful punishment
16|64|We revealed this Book to you so that you may resolve their disputes. (It is) a guidance and mercy for any nation that believes
16|65|Allah sends rain down from the sky. With that (water), He brings the dead barren land back to life. Surely, there is a sign in it for any nation that listens
16|66|Surely, there exists a lesson for you in the cattle. We bring out _ from between the dung and the blood _ pure milk, a tasty soothing drink
16|67|And from the dates and grapes, you extract wine as well as healthy nourishment. Surely, there is a sign in it for any nation that thinks
16|68|And your Lord inspired the bee to build its hive on the hills and the trees, and on the rooftops of buildings
16|69|And (He inspired the bee) to suck the nectar of all kinds of fruit, and follow the smooth path laid down by your Lord. Extracts of varying colors, having medicinal properties for people, ooze out from its body. Surely, there is a sign in it for any nation that ponders
16|70|Allah created you and He will give you death. Some of you live to a feeble old age, so that once again you forget those few things you learn in life! Surely, Allah is the Knower and really Proficient
16|71|And Allah has excelled some of you over others in wealth. Those given preferences do not hand over their riches to their slaves, letting their slaves rise to a status equal to theirs. Yet they fail to acknowledge the blessings of Allah
16|72|And Allah provided you spouses from your own kind, and through them He granted you children and grand children. He gave you good clean means of living! Yet, they believe the absurd and show ingratitude for the blessings of Allah
16|73|And they worship others besides Allah __ those who do not provide any subsistence from the heavens or the earth. Nor do they have any such power
16|74|Therefore, do not try to teach Allah! Surely, Allah knows it (all), while you know nothing (at all)
16|75|Allah quotes the example of a bonded slave who does not own a thing. To another, We have granted enough riches, and he spends his wealth, openly and in secret. Can the two be equal? (Of course not)! All praise is for Allah! But most people do not know
16|76|Allah quotes another example, that of the two men. One is deaf and dumb, has no ability and is nothing but a liability for his master. He fails every task he is asked to perform. Can he be compared to the man who manages his affairs with fairness, and is on the straight path
16|77|The mysteries of the heavens and the earth belong to Allah, and the hour (of Judgment) will come about in a blink of an eye, even less than that. Surely, Allah has power over all things
16|78|Allah brings you out of your mother´s womb, devoid of any knowledge! He gives you the faculties of hearing and sight, and He gives you the heart! Perhaps you will be thankful
16|79|Have they not observed the birds? Freely they glide in the sky! No one holds them there except Allah! Surely, there are signs in it for a nation that believes
16|80|Allah provided houses for you to rest and stay in peace, and from the hides of cattle He brought about for you the tents (temporary abodes). You find it light as you pitch it to stay, and as you pack it to travel. From the wool, fur and the hair of cattle, He brought about furnishings and other benefits for you __ all for a while
16|81|Allah brought about shelters and protection for you out of what He created. He provides you refuge in the mountains (caves), the garments to shield you from heat, and the shirts to shield you from injury (during combat). Thus, He made His blessings complete upon you! Perhaps, you would bow in obedience
16|82|Of course, in case they ignore and turn away, your obligation is to convey the message in clear and precise terms
16|83|They recognize the blessings of Allah, and yet renounce them! Most of them are unbelievers
16|84|On that day, out of every nation We will call out a witness to testify against them. The unbelievers, then, will neither be allowed to offer excuses, nor urged to seek forgiveness
16|85|They will witness their inevitable torture! Their sentence will not be lightened! Nor shall they have a respite
16|86|Those guilty of ascribing partners to Allah, will spot those partners (on the Day of Judgment) and will cry out, "Oh our Lord, these are the ones we used to worship besides You!" In response, they will retort, "You are liars
16|87|On that day, they will extend an offer of peace towards Allah. The lies they used to invent will fritter away
16|88|There are those who refuse to believe, and also place obstacles on the path of Allah. Because of their treachery, We will augment their agony by enhancing their punishment
16|89|That day, against each nation We will summon one of their own as a witness, and (Oh Mohammed, SAW) against these people We will bring you out to testify. We have granted you this book, which explains everything. It is the guidance, the mercy and glad tidings for those who submit
16|90|Indeed, Allah orders you to be fair and magnanimous, and to show kindness to the kinsfolk! He forbids immoral deeds, detestable acts and fornication. He counsels you; perhaps you will heed
16|91|And if you undertake a pledge with Allah, live up to it. Do not break your vows once you have affirmed them and have invoked Allah as your guarantor! Allah knows what you do
16|92|Do not be like the woman who spun her yarn into fine thread and then shredded it to pieces. You employ your oaths as mere ploys, so that your nation gains superiority over all others. In fact, Allah tests you with it! On the Day of Judgment, He will disclose to you all that you used to dispute
16|93|Had Allah wished, He would have created you all as a single nation. But He guides or leads astray whomever He pleases. And you would very definitely be interrogated regarding everything you used to do
16|94|And do not employ your oaths as ploys, lest you stumble again just as you are becoming steady on your feet. If you prevent people from the path of Allah, you will experience a calamity and a terrible punishment
16|95|And do not trade away your covenant with Allah for a mere pittance. That which is with Allah is better for you, if you only know
16|96|What you have does not last, while that which is with Allah is eternal. We will most certainly reward those who persevere __ a reward commensurate with the best of their deeds
16|97|We will let those who do good deeds __ men or women, provided they believe __ have a wholesome life in this world. And We will surely, reward them in keeping with the best of their deeds
16|98|So, before you recite the Qur´an, seek refuge with Allah from Shaitan, the cursed one
16|99|He (Shaitan) certainly does not hold sway over anyone who believes and reposes his trust in Allah
16|100|In fact, he exerts his power over those who befriend him and ascribe him to be a partner
16|101|And when We bring a verse in place of another __ Allah knows best what He reveals __ they say, "Surely, you have made it up." Most of them in fact do not understand
16|102|Say, "The Holy Spirit (Angel Gibra´eel) brings the absolute truth from your Lord, in order to consolidate those who believe. It is the guidance and the glad tiding for the obedient
16|103|And surely, We know what they allege! That a man has taught him (Mohammed, SAW)! The language of the one they allude to, however, is not Arabic, while this (Qur´an) is in precise and perfect Arabic
16|104|Surely, Allah does not guide those who refuse to believe in the verses of Allah. For them, there is the painful punishment
16|105|Surely, the unbelievers fabricate lies __ those who do not believe in the verses of Allah. They, indeed, are the liars
16|106|The one who denies after having first believed __ not the one who is coerced (into unbelief) while his heart is firm on belief, but rather the one who rejects with the full approval of his heart __ earns the wrath of Allah. For him, there is a tremendous punishment
16|107|Because they prefer the life of this world to that of the afterlife! Allah does not guide the nation of unbelievers
16|108|Allah has sealed off their hearts, their hearing and their sight. They are careless and neglectful
16|109|No doubt at all! They will be the losers in the life-to-come
16|110|Surely, your Lord is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful for those who, having been tortured (for the sake of Allah), emigrate and continue to struggle and persevere patiently
16|111|That day, every soul will arrive squabbling about itself, and each will receive in full the result of its action. Not a soul will be treated unjustly
16|112|Allah cites the example of a peaceful and tranquil town. It enjoyed abundance and opulence. Its provisions came to it from every source. But its inhabitants showed ingratitude towards the blessings of Allah. So, as a result of their deeds, Allah wrapped them in famine and fear
16|113|Indeed, a messenger __ from amongst their own people __ had already come to them. But they called him a liar! So the punishment grabbed them. They were evildoers
16|114|Eat the allowable wholesome food Allah has provided, and show gratitude for the blessings of Allah __ if you in fact, worship Him exclusively
16|115|Dead animal, blood and swine-flesh are what Allah has forbidden for you, and also the offerings made to deities other than Allah. But if someone (eats because he) is forced by dire necessity __ not out of desire or habit __ then, surely Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Kind
16|116|You concoct lies about Allah! You blurt out and falsely claim some things to be permissible, others not! Those who fabricate lies about Allah will never prosper
16|117|(After this) brief enjoyment, theirs is the painful punishment
16|118|And for those who became Jews, We prescribed what We have described to you earlier. We did not oppress them. Rather, they used to treat their own selves unjustly
16|119|There are those who commit wrongful acts out of foolish ignorance, but later repent and make amends. Surely, for them your Lord is the most Forgiving and the most Kind
16|120|And Ibraheem was a nation (all by himself), obedient to Allah and a true believer. He was not an idolater
16|121|He was grateful for the blessings. (Allah) chose him and led him to the straight path
16|122|In this world, We gave him the bounties, and surely, in the afterlife, he will be amongst the righteous
16|123|Then, We revealed to you to follow the nation of Ibraheem, the true believer. He was not an idolater
16|124|The Sabbath was something made obligatory upon those who quarreled about it. On the Day of Judgment your Lord will definitely decide and settle all matters in which they now differ
16|125|Call them towards the path of your Lord with wisdom and right advice, and debate with them amicably. Surely, your Lord knows very well who has deviated from His path, just as He knows best who are the well guided
16|126|Should you want to retaliate, get even only to the extent you were wronged. But to endure and bear calmly is much better for those who are steadfast
16|127|Be patient! The patience, too, comes from Allah! Do not grieve over them! Do not feel uneasy about their deceit
16|128|Of course, Allah is on the side of the righteous and the beneficent
17|1|Exalted is He Who took His servant one night from the sacred masjid (in Mecca) to the masjid in Jerusalem _ the vicinity of which We have blessed _ so that We may show him Our signs. Surely, He listens and hears all
17|2|We awarded Musa the book, and deemed it to be the directive for the Israelites, that they should not accept anyone other than Me as their Lord
17|3|Oh you, the sons of those whom We put aboard (a ship) with Nooh! Surely, he was a grateful person
17|4|In the book, We foretold the destiny of Israelites, "Twice you will cause severe mischief in the land and exceed greatly in arrogance
17|5|At the time of the first prediction (mischief), We sent (in combat) against you, one of Our powerful nations. They were well versed in warfare and they stormed through your homes. The promise had to come true
17|6|Then (when you repented), We restored you back to power. We bolstered you with resources and offspring and caused you to abound in numbers. (And said)
17|7|Your good deeds are for your own good, and similarly, your bad deeds are to afflict your own self!" At the time of the second prediction, (We sent another nation) to mangle your faces and to run over your masjid just like the first time, and to lay in ruin everything they laid their hands on
17|8|Maybe (now) your Lord will have mercy on you. But if you repeat (your offense), We shall reinstate (Our punishment). We have fashioned hell to be a prison for the unbelievers
17|9|Indeed, this Qur´an leads on to an appropriate and secure path. It gives the good news to those who perform righteous deeds, that theirs is a great reward
17|10|And We have prepared a painful punishment for those who do not believe in the afterlife
17|11|Man covets wickedness as if it were something admirable; man happens to be hasty
17|12|We appointed both the night and the day as signs. One of the signs _ the night _ We made dim, while We made the day bright and full of light, so that you may seek the blessings of your Lord, and so that you may count the years and have a measure of time. Thus, We have explained everything in detail
17|13|We have forced each one´s actions to hang around his neck. On the Day of Judgment, We will bring out his record of deeds; he will find it an open book
17|14|Read your record! Today, even you shall suffice to evaluate your own self
17|15|The one who adopts the guidance (of the Qur´an) does so only for his own benefit. The one who strays also does so for his own self. No soul shall carry another´s burden! We never inflict punishment, unless We have already sent around messengers
17|16|When We resolve to ruin a town, (and before We actually destroy it), We first order its affluent inhabitants (to obey). They carry on their lives of sin. So the prediction (against them) comes to pass. Thereafter, We finish them off completely
17|17|Many towns have We destroyed after Nooh. Your Lord is Aware, and He is enough to watch over the sins of His created beings
17|18|We grant the wishes in this (transitory) world _ whatever We please and for whomever We decide. For the one who prefers this temporal existence, We have prepared hell (in the hereafter). He will join it, cursed and ostracized
17|19|Provided he is a believer, anyone who desires (the rewards of) the afterlife and strives effectively for it, will discover that his efforts have found acceptance
17|20|We bestow the bounties of your Lord to both _ this group as well as that. The grant of your Lord is not restricted
17|21|But observe how We, in this world, excel some over others; and the afterlife is bigger in status and higher in esteem
17|22|Do not associate any god with Allah, else you shall find yourself cursed and abandoned
17|23|Your Lord has decreed that you should not worship anyone other than Him, and that you treat your parents well. When either, or both of them, reach an old age do not grumble and do not be angry with them. Rather, always have kind words to say to them
17|24|Be responsive to them and treat them with kindness and compassion, and say, "Oh my Lord. Have mercy on them as they brought me up when I was a small child
17|25|Your Lord is fully aware of the thoughts that cross your mind. If you are righteous (then remember), your Lord forgives those who turn to Him in repentance
17|26|And honor the rights of the kinsfolk, the poor and needy, and the homeless; and do not be overly wasteful
17|27|Surely, the spendthrift are the brothers of Shaitan; and Shaitan is ungrateful to his Lord
17|28|Speak to them politely even if you must decline them, because you might still be awaiting and looking for the blessings of your Lord
17|29|Do not have your hands restrained to your neck (do not be stingy), nor stretch them free and unfettered (nor be a spendthrift), lest you later feel sorry and constrained
17|30|Your Lord certainly provides the provisions in abundance _ or limits them _ to whomever He pleases. Indeed, He is all Knowing, and Watchful over His servants
17|31|Do not, out of fear of poverty, put your offspring to death. We shall provide them as well as you, the means of life. Killing your offspring is a blunder of a grave proportion
17|32|And do not even wander close to extra marital sex. Indeed, adultery is a way of decadence
17|33|And do not kill anyone. Allah has prohibited it, except when it is rightful and befitting (and corresponds to the crime). We have awarded a right (of redress) to the heir of a person wrongfully killed. But let him not exceed the bounds and overdo in (his quest to seek redress by) killing. He is to be helped
17|34|And do not approach the assets of an orphan except with noble intentions, right until he comes of age. Honor your pacts! Surely you are answerable for your pacts
17|35|When you measure, be exact (do not curtail); and when you weigh, use the correct and proper scales (do not diminish). This is beneficial for you, and better in consequences
17|36|Do not take a stand about anything you have no knowledge of. Indeed, the ears the eyes and the heart have all to render an account
17|37|And do not walk on the earth arrogantly. You will neither wear down the earth, nor match the stature of the mountains
17|38|All of that is wrong and despised by your Lord
17|39|This wisdom is revealed to you by your Lord! Do not accept any god other than Allah; else you will be hurled into hell _ cursed and ostracized
17|40|(Oh you who accept gods other than Allah), did your Lord favor you with sons while He settled on angels as daughters for Himself? Surely what you utter is a grave thing
17|41|We have repeatedly explained matters in this Qur´an, so they may come to their senses. But it has only intensified their aversion (for the truth)
17|42|Say
17|43|Glorified is He! Exalted and far above what they assert
17|44|The seven heavens, the earth, and all those who exist therein, glorify Him. There isn´t anything that does not chant His praises! But you fail to (hear their chants, or) comprehend their manner of praise. Surely, He is Gentle and Forgiving
17|45|As you recite the Qur´an, We station an invisible shield between you and those who do not believe in the afterlife
17|46|We have encased their hearts in covers, so they understand nothing; and their ears are plugged with corks. When you mention none but your Lord in the Qur´an, they scornfully turn their backs on you
17|47|We know (their motives) very well. We know what they (want to) hear when they listen to you closely! When the evildoers talk secretly (with their companions), they say, "You are merely following a man possessed
17|48|See! How they depict you? They have strayed off and cannot find the way
17|49|They ask, "Once we turn into dust and bones, will we be raised back to a renewed existence
17|50|Say, "(Yes! Indeed, even if you) turn into stone or steel
17|51|Or any other matter which, in your mind is harder (to resurrect)." They will say, "Who will bring us back?" Say, "The One who brought you into being the first time!" Then, they will shake their heads at you and say, "When will that happen?" Say, "It might be close at hand
17|52|When He orders you to emerge on that day, you will comply (and come out) singing praises for Him. You will assume that you had stayed on this earth only for a brief while
17|53|Tell My servants to always say the right thing! Surely, Shaitan incites them to do evil. Shaitan is the professed enemy of the human beings
17|54|Your Lord knows your circumstances very well. If He pleases He will have mercy on you, and He will punish you if He so please. (Oh Muhammad, SAW) We did not appoint you a manager over them
17|55|Your Lord knows all those in the heavens and the earth. He has exalted some messengers over others; He gave Da´ood the Zaboor (the book ´Psalm´ in Bible)
17|56|Say, "Call those you claim (to be gods) beside Him. They do not possess any ability either to remove, or to modify any hardship
17|57|They themselves pray to Him and vie each other to seek the means to get closer to Him. They hope for His mercy and fear His punishment. Indeed, the punishment of your Lord deserves to be feared
17|58|There is no town that We will not destroy _ or punish severely _ before the Day of Judgment. This is inscribed in the book of decrees
17|59|Nothing prevents Us from producing miracles. But the earlier people had rejected them! We assigned the camel as a proof for the people of ´Samood´, but they committed an outrage. We only display signs to serve as a warning
17|60|(Remember) We said to you that your Lord has confined and contained people. We appointed the vision, _ the one we showed you _ and the mention of the cursed tree (the tree of ´zaqum´) in the Qur´an to be a trial for the people. We alerted them. Yet, it only increased their defiance immensely
17|61|When We told the angels to fall prostrate before Adam they did, except Iblees! He said "Shall I fall prostrate before the one You have fashioned from clay
17|62|He said, "Look at him! You gave him precedence over me? If You give me an opportunity till the Day of Judgment, I will outwit and mislead their entire generations! (Only) a few will escape my lure
17|63|Said, "Get out of here! Hell is the just recompense, a plentiful penalty for both _ you and those of them who follow you
17|64|Tempt and allure them _ anyone among them you can _ with your sly talk. Raid them with your horses and men, bamboozle a share in their wealth and children, and hold out (false) promises for them." Surely Shaitan´s promise is nothing but an illusion
17|65|Of course, you shall have no hold over My servants; your Lord is sufficient as a Trustee
17|66|Your Lord makes the ship sail in the ocean so you could seek His blessings. Indeed, He is ever so merciful towards you
17|67|When trouble strikes you at sea, all those you invoke except Him, vanish (from your consciousness). And when He rescues you (and leads you) back to shore, you again turn away! Man is most ungrateful
17|68|Do you then feel secure that He will not cause you to sink and go under even on dry land? Or send hurricanes upon you and no one will be there to guard you
17|69|Or are you sure that He will not make you go back to sea for a second time, send a cyclone upon you and drown you for your disbelief? Then, you will find no one to assist you against Us
17|70|Indeed, We have honored the descendants of Adam. We let them move about in the land and sea, provided them wholesome food, and markedly excelled them over many of Our other created species
17|71|That day, We will summon all human beings with their record of deeds. Those given their records in their right (hand) will read it (eagerly). They shall not be wronged a bit
17|72|The one who (refuses to see, and so) does not see in this life, will be blind in the afterlife; he shall be farther away from the way
17|73|(Oh prophet!) They almost succeeded in enticing you away from Our revelations, in almost getting you to declare something contrary to Our revelations. They would have then called you a friend
17|74|Had We not kept you staunch, you would surely have begun to lean a little towards them
17|75|If so, We would have you taste the torment _ twice as much in life and twice as severe after death. You would not find any helper against Us
17|76|They had stirred you up enough and had almost succeeded in driving you out of the land. If so, they too, had not stayed behind much longer
17|77|This was Our established practice with every messenger We sent prior to you. You will not detect any departure in Our practice
17|78|And stand in prayers from sunset till dusk, and recite the Qur´an at dawn. Surely, the recitation of the Qur´an at dawn is well attended (by angels)
17|79|And prior to dawn, perform the tahajjud (non-obligatory) prayer at night. Your Lord may elevate you to the most exalted status (in heaven)
17|80|And say, "Oh Lord, usher me into the threshold (of events in life) with the truth; and take me through the outcome (of events) with the truth, and by Your grace appoint for me a mighty ally
17|81|And say, "The truth is here and falsehood has ceased to be! Indeed, falsehood is ever bound to vanish
17|82|That which We revealed in the Qur´an is the mercy and the cure for the believers, and it only multiplies the losses of the evil doers
17|83|Man stays aloof and disregards (the message) when We make (life) pleasant for him, and despairs when he encounters a calamity
17|84|Each one acts according to his own way. Your Lord knows better those, who are well guided and on the (straight) path
17|85|They ask your opinion about the ´Rooh´ (the soul)! Say, "The ´Rooh´ (the soul) is by the command of your Lord. The knowledge imparted to you is just so scanty
17|86|Surely, if We please We could revoke the knowledge revealed to you thus far. Then, you will find nothing to promote your cause with Us
17|87|Other than mercy from your Lord! Indeed, His favors upon you are enormous
17|88|Say, "If the humans and jinn were to assemble in an attempt to create anything akin to this Qur´an, they would definitely fail, even if they assisted each other
17|89|In this Qur´an, We have thoroughly explained all sorts of examples. But most folks reject everything and insist upon disbelieving
17|90|They say, "We would never believe you unless you could cause springs to gush out of the earth
17|91|Or (unless) you owned orchards of dates and grapes, and commandeered rivers to flow through them
17|92|Or (else, we dare you to) make the sky tumble down upon us in pieces _ like you claim it might _ and have Allah and His angels appear (face to face) before us
17|93|(We might believe you) if your house was made of gold, or you were to rise up into the sky. And we would only trust your ascension if you brought down a book for us to read (and verify)!" Say, "Exalted is my Lord! Am I not just a human being appointed to be His messenger
17|94|Nothing prevented people from accepting the guidance once it had arrived, except that they cynically raised the question, "Has Allah appointed a human being to be His messenger
17|95|Say, "Had angels populated the earth, _ moving about peacefully in it _ We would certainly have sent another angel from heaven as a messenger for them
17|96|Say, "Allah is a sufficient witness between you and me. Indeed He watches over His servants and is well Aware
17|97|The one whom Allah shows the way is indeed well guided! And you will not find any helper other than Him, for the one whom Allah leads astray. We will gather all such people on the Day of Judgment. Blind, dumb and deaf, they shall lie flat on their faces. Hell is to be their abode! We shall ignite the hellfire into a blazing inferno whenever it begins to subside
17|98|Such shall be their punishment. They rejected Our signs and asked, "Once we are bones and bits, will we be awakened into a renewed existence
17|99|Do they not see? Allah Who created the heavens and the earth, is capable of creating the likes of them (anew), and of assigning a specific time (for them). There is no doubt about it. The evil doers insist upon disbelief
17|100|Say, "Even if you had treasures of what my Lord blessed you with, you would still, for fear of poverty, hold it back (not spend it)." Man is indeed stingy
17|101|We had granted Musa nine very clear proofs. Ask the children of Israel! When (the proofs) appeared before them, the pharaoh said, "Indeed, Oh Musa, I think you are a man possessed
17|102|Musa said, "You of course know that these signs are definitely the eye opening proofs from the Lord of the heavens and the earth! Indeed, oh Pharaoh, I think you are ready to be ruined
17|103|Then, he resolved to dislodge them (the children of Israel) from the land, but We drowned him and all those with him
17|104|Later, to the children of Israel We said, "Inhabit the earth till the promise of the afterlife is fulfilled. Then, We will bring you out as a crowd
17|105|We revealed it (the Qur´an) as an absolute truth and it came (to you) as an absolute truth! In fact, We have appointed you as just a bearer of glad tidings, and as a Warner
17|106|We have segmented this Qur´an in parts, so you may recite it to the people a little at a time. We have revealed it gradually, step by step
17|107|Say, "You may believe in this Qur´an or choose not to. But, when it is read to those who know the scriptures, they (are overwhelmed, and) fall down on their faces in prostration
17|108|And they say, "Our Lord is exalted. Our Lord´s promise shall definitely happen
17|109|They fall down on their faces, choked up and sobbing. It (the Qur´an) fills them with humbleness
17|110|Say, "Call Him Allah, or call him Rehman. Whichever name you call Him by, (remember) His attributes are the most beautiful. During your ´salat´, do not raise your voice too loud, nor lower it to a virtual whisper. Rather, adopt a moderate tone
17|111|And say, "All praise is for Allah Who did not beget a son, and Who shares the Lordship of His domain with none! And He (has no weakness, therefore) requires no friend to mask any weakness. So, Glorify Him for His Greatness and Majesty
18|1|All the praise belongs to Allah, Who revealed the book to His servant, and in it is included nothing queer
18|2|(It is) straightforward, to sound a prior warning about His stern punishment, and to deliver the happy news to the believers, _ those of them with good deeds _ that theirs shall be the bountiful rewards
18|3|In it (the paradise), they shall reside forever
18|4|And to admonish those who claim that Allah has begotten a son
18|5|Regarding that, neither they nor their forefathers had any knowledge. Presumptuous are the words that escape their lips! What they utter is nothing but a falsehood
18|6|Would you, then, be overcome with sorrow and agonize over their refusal to accept this message (contained in the Qur´an)
18|7|We have, in fact, fashioned everything in this world as mere adornments in order to test them! To see who amongst them performs the righteous deeds
18|8|And We are definitely going to convert the earth into a bone-dry barren plateau
18|9|Do you regard the companions of the cave and the inscription tablet (upon the cave) as exceptional marvels among Our signs
18|10|Those young men sought refuge in the cave and said, "Our Lord! By Your grace, grant us Your mercy and resolve our affairs suitably
18|11|So, in that cave We lulled them to sleep for many years
18|12|Then, (many years later) We awakened them so We may know which of their groups correctly estimates the length of their stay in the cave
18|13|We narrate to you their true tale. The young men had faith in their Lord, and We enhanced them in guidance
18|14|We fortified their hearts because they stood firm and said, "Our Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth! We shall call upon no god other than Him. Else, we shall have severely exceeded the bounds
18|15|This nation of ours accepts gods other than Him. Why do they not give a valid justification in support? Who then, is more evil than the one inventing lies about Allah
18|16|Seek refuge in that cave, now that you have parted company with them, as well as those they worship other than Allah. Your Lord will shower His mercy upon you and will attend to your needs and comforts
18|17|(Had you been there) you would see (the rays of) the sun _ as it rises and sets _ falling obliquely across the right of the cave and turning away past its left, while the men lay in the midst (of the cave). These are the signs of Allah. The rightly guided is the one whom Allah guides. You will not find any patron to guide the one who is led astray
18|18|You would think they were awake, although they were asleep. We rolled them on their sides _ right and left. With outstretched limbs, their dog lay close to the entrance (of the cave). Had you just caught a glimpse of them, you would be struck with terror and you would turn around and flee
18|19|Thus We awakened them so they may question one another. One of them asked, "How long did we stay (here)?" Others responded, "A day! Perhaps less!" They all said, "Our Lord alone knows how long we stayed (in this cave). Let us send one of us to the town with this coin. With it, let him buy and bring to us the best, most wholesome food. And let him proceed with caution. Let no one know about you
18|20|If they overcome you they may stone you to death, or compel you to rejoin their faith. In the later case, you will never ever be successful
18|21|In that miraculous manner, We made them (the people) stumble upon (that cave). So that they would know for sure that Allah´s promise is real, and that there is no doubt about the hour (of judgment). But instead, they carried on their dispute and said, "Let us build a monument over them. Only their Lord knows the truth about them!" Those who were in charge said, "We shall definitely turn the site into a place of worship
18|22|They will say, "(That they were) three, the fourth was their dog." Others also conjecture (and put the figure at) five, counting the dog six. Still others say, "Seven! Their dog was the eighth." Say, "My Lord knows their true number! Others know only very little." So, do not discuss that about them except cursorily, nor inquire anyone about them
18|23|And regarding anything, do not say, "I will do that tomorrow
18|24|(Rather add), "If Allah pleases!" (Insha Allah)! Should you forget this, then remember your Lord (when you recall) and say, "Perhaps, my Lord will lead me towards that which is more appropriate, and a sensible conduct
18|25|They stayed in that cave for three centuries, and nine more years
18|26|And say, "Allah knows exactly how long they stayed! To Him belong the secrets of the heavens and the earth! He hears (everything) clearly, and He sees (everything) plainly. They have no patrons besides Him, and He includes none in His decisions and domain
18|27|And recite (without modification) the revelation from the book of your Lord. No one may change the words of your Lord! (If you did) you will not find any safe place from Him
18|28|Be contented with yourself and with those who pray to their Lord morning and evening, seeking His pleasure. Do not turn your eyes away from them, nor seek the allure of the life of this world. Do not follow anyone who slams his mind shut upon Our advice, follows his own whims and is immoderate in his affairs
18|29|Say, "This is the truth! It is from your Lord! So, (now) whoever wants may believe it. If anyone wishes to disbelieve, let him." For the evildoers We have prepared a fire. Like a canopy of conflagration, it will surround them completely. They shall plead for help and shall be treated with water _ more like boiling oil _ which will scald their mouths. A miserable drink served in a wretched place
18|30|And We will definitely not waste the rewards of the believers _ those who do good deeds
18|31|These are the ones! There exists for them an eternal paradise with rivers flowing right through. As ornaments, they shall don bracelets made of gold, and their garments will be made of lush green silk and brocade. They shall rest poised on elevated thrones. What an excellent apparel in an exquisite place
18|32|And quote the parable of the two men. We gave one of them two gardens of grapes, each bordered with date trees. Between (these gardens) We placed cultivated fields of green crops
18|33|The vine gardens held back nothing. Both of them bore their fruit to the maximum. We ran a stream between the two gardens
18|34|And thus he benefited a lot. While talking to his friend once, he said, "I am better than you in wealth as well as slaves, sons and other personnel
18|35|While entering his garden he committed an outrage upon his own self (he was boastful and cynical). He said, "I do not think all this will ever perish
18|36|The hour (of judgment) I think, will not occur. If at all I am sent back to my Lord, I shall find even better bounties reserved for me
18|37|His companion conversed with him and said, "Aren´t you being ungrateful to the One Who created you; first from dust then from a drop of semen, and then shaped you into a man
18|38|As far as I am concerned, Allah is my Lord. I will never associate anyone with my Lord
18|39|So, upon entering your garden, why did you not say, ´If Allah wills! (Insha Allah)´. There is no power except that of Allah! (At present) you find me possessing fewer children and riches than you do
18|40|It is possible that my Lord may yet grant me a better garden, while he may strike yours (with a bolt) from the blue, leaving it slippery and barren
18|41|Or its water may sink deep underground, and you will be unable to retrieve it
18|42|(Destruction) closed in on his fruit all around. He wrung his hands in remorse and lamented over what he had spent (and lost) on the garden. It lay in ruin, dreary and desolate. He said, "If only I hadn´t committed a ´shirk´ (ascribed associates) with my Lord
18|43|Except Allah nobody could help him, nor could he help himself
18|44|At that time (he knew that) the actual authority belongs only to Allah, the real and true (God). The rewards and consequences He bestows are far better
18|45|And explain to them by quoting this example: the life of this world is like water We sent down from the sky. The plants assimilate it and become fresh and green. Later they turn into chaff, which the wind scatters around. Indeed, Allah has mastery over all things
18|46|The wealth and children are mere adornments for the life of this world. In the eyes of Allah, the good deeds one leaves behind are better in terms of expectations and outcome
18|47|You will see the earth turned into an even field when We cause the mountains to become pulverized (into clouds of dust). We will gather all of them together. None shall be absent
18|48|They shall be made to line up before their Lord in rows. (Allah will say), "Now! You have arrived before Us just as We created you the first time! And you thought We would not appoint a time (of reckoning) for you
18|49|The book (of deeds) shall be placed. And you will find the criminals panicky, afraid of what it might contain. They will say, "Oh, pity on us! What a book! Nothing is missing in it! Every single thing _ minor as well as major _ has been listed!" They will find everything they ever did, described (in the book in detail). Your Lord will be unfair to no one
18|50|When We ordered the Angels to prostrate themselves before Adam, they all did _ except Iblees (Shaitan). He is a jinn and he defied the command of your Lord. Yet, instead of Me (Allah) you accept him (Shaitan) and his descendants, as friends _ even though they are the enemies. Evil is the final end of the evil doers
18|51|I did not let them witness the creation of the heavens and the earth, nor the creation of their own selves. I wouldn´t accept as aides those who lead men astray
18|52|That day He will say, "Go on! Scream and call (for help) all those you claimed were My partners". And call they would, indeed! But they shall receive no response! We shall place a barrier between them
18|53|The criminals (that day) will witness the hellfire, fearing that they will (inevitably) fall into it. They will find no way to escape
18|54|Surely, We have mentioned in this Qur´an all sorts of examples for the people. But man happens to be more bickersome than anything
18|55|Now that the guidance is here, nothing must keep people from believing and seeking forgiveness from their Lord. Else, the tradition of the earlier folks would be repeated, and they would come face to face with a severe torment
18|56|We sent the messengers only as bearers of glad tidings, and as warners. But the unbelievers quarrel. They attempt to refute the truth with baseless discussions. They mock My signs and that about which they´re being warned
18|57|Who could be worse than the one who turns away and shuns the signs of his Lord, even though he is being reminded of them? He forgets the kinds of deeds he has committed. Indeed, We have set a lid over their hearts; so they fail to understand (the Qur´an). There exists a heavy load in their ears. Therefore, you may call them towards the truth, but they shall not be led on to the right path
18|58|Your Lord is the most Forgiving; He is the Lord of Mercy. If He were to grab them over all (the sins) they gather He would punish them instantly. But, their time (of reckoning) is preordained. Beyond that, they shall find no refuge
18|59|We brought to ruin all those towns because they were wicked. We fixed a specific time for the destruction (of each town)
18|60|(And tell them) when Musa said to his attendant, "I will not give up. I will keep going till I reach the confluence of the rivers, even if it takes several years
18|61|They reached the confluence, but forgot the fish (they had with them). It slipped away and found its way into the sea
18|62|When they went past (the confluence) he (Musa) said to the attendant, "Prepare our meal. We have really suffered so much fatigue in this journey
18|63|The attendant replied, "Did you see what happened? We were relaxing upon that cliff and I lost sight of the fish! It was Shaitan! He made me forget to mention it. The fish mysteriously found its way into the sea
18|64|(Musa) said, "That (sign) is precisely what we were looking for!" So they retraced their steps and went back (to that cliff)
18|65|There, they met Our servant. We had showered Our mercy upon him, and had taught him (a special) knowledge
18|66|Musa asked, "May I follow you? Can you impart to me the (special) guidance you have been taught
18|67|He said, "I am sure you will not be able to bear me with patience
18|68|How can you remain patient about something you have no knowledge of
18|69|(Musa) said, "Allah willing, you will find me a patient person. I will not disobey you in any matter
18|70|He said, "You may accompany me but do not ask any questions until I bring the matter up myself
18|71|So they proceeded till they boarded a ship. The man drilled a hole (in its keel). (Musa) said, "You bore a hole in the ship to drown all its passengers. You have no doubt committed a dreadful act
18|72|(The man) said, "Did I not warn you? You will not be able to put up with me so patiently
18|73|(Musa) said, "Do not blame me. I forgot. Do not make me undergo such a trying situation
18|74|They proceeded again till they met a lad. The man killed him. (Musa) said, "You have taken an innocent life without any justification. Of course, you committed an evil act
18|75|(The man) said, "Did I not tell you? Indeed, you would be unable to bear me with patience
18|76|(Musa) said, "Don´t let me accompany you if I ask anything after this! There, you now have a reason (to part company)
18|77|The two men resumed (their journey), reached a town and requested food. The townfolks refused to put them up as guests. In the town, the man found a wall about ready to crumble. (The man) repaired it. (Musa) said, "Of course, if you wanted, you could have charged them for it
18|78|(The Man) said, "This is where we bid farewell to each other! I will give you the explanation of the things you could not endure
18|79|As for the ship, it belongs to some poor folks who operate it in the sea. I sought to make it defective; a king nearby, seizes all the (defect-free) ships forcibly
18|80|As for the boy, his parents are true believers. We feared that he would (grow up to) disobey them, oppress them and make them suffer tremendously
18|81|We wished that their Lord would grant them in exchange a just, honest and a more merciful (offspring)
18|82|And buried under the wall is a treasure. It belongs to two orphan brothers in town. Their father was pious! Your Lord decreed that (the boys) should discover (the treasure) when they attain the age of maturity. A mercy from your Lord. I did nothing of my own accord. That, in fact, was the reality which you witnessed but could not endure
18|83|They inquire about Dhul Qurnain. Say, "Here, I will tell you about him
18|84|We established him firmly in the land and laid at his disposal the means to obtain everything
18|85|He undertook a mission
18|86|And reached the land of the setting sun. He saw the sun setting behind the murky hot springs. And he found a people living there nearby. We said, "Oh Dhul Qurnain! You may punish them, or treat them nicely
18|87|He said, "We will punish the evil doer ourselves. Later, he returns to his Lord, Who will punish him with a woeful torture
18|88|(Dhul Qurnain said), "But the best of reward _ (paradise) _ is for the one who believes and acts righteously. We will treat him with kindness
18|89|Then he undertook another mission (eastward)
18|90|(And pressed on) till he reached the land of the rising sun. He found the sun rising upon a (primitive) people. We had not arranged any shelter for them against the sun
18|91|Such (was their state); and We knew exactly what he (Dhul Qurnain) possessed
18|92|Then he went on yet another mission
18|93|Until he reached a mountainous area and found in the valley a people who understood almost nothing
18|94|They said, "These Yajog and Majog run amock in the land. May we pay you a tax to have a barrier erected between them and us
18|95|Said, "(Thanks, but) the power my Lord has granted is enough (and far better)! Just help me with your manpower. I shall build a wall between them and you
18|96|Bring me blocks of steel." He blocked up the valley between the mountains (with a wall of steel) and said. "Now start a fire and blow (air through your bellows) till the wall becomes red hot." Then he said, "Bring me the molten copper to pour over the (iron) wall
18|97|The barbarians could neither scale (the wall) nor breach it
18|98|Said, "This is my Lord´s mercy upon you! (However) when the time comes for (the fulfillment of) my Lord´s promise, He will demolish it! My Lord´s promise is absolutely true
18|99|That day We will leave them rolling over each other (like waves), and then the trumpet will sound and We will gather them all together
18|100|And We shall display and bring within sight hell for the unbelievers
18|101|Those, whose eyes are sheathed (and insulated) against My reminder (the Qur´an) cannot stand even to listen to it
18|102|Did the unbelievers suppose that they can take _ instead of Me _ My slaves as their masters and get away with it? Indeed! To do them the honors, We have prepared hell
18|103|Say, "May we tell you about the worst of the losers
18|104|They are those who (in reality) squander away their efforts in the life of this world, yet regard their deeds to be good
18|105|Such are the ones who reject the signs of their Lord and the (forthcoming) meeting with Him. So their efforts amount to nothing. On the Day of Judgment, We shall assign them no weight at all
18|106|They shall have their reward _ hell. Because they disbelieved, and mocked My signs and My messengers
18|107|On the other hand, those who believe and do good deeds shall be honored with (the gift of) the gardens of paradise
18|108|There they shall live forever. They shall never desire to depart
18|109|Say, "Had the ocean served as ink to write about Allah, then surely the ocean would run out, but the narrative about Allah would not. Even if We supplied that much more ink as a refill
18|110|Say, "Surely, I am just a man like you. Revelation has been sent to me that your God is only one God! Hence, those hoping to meet their Lord should seek the righteous acts, and should not accept any partners in the worship of their Lord
19|1|Kaaf, Ya, Ain, Saad
19|2|This is the account of the blessings of your Lord upon Zakaria, His servant
19|3|When once he addressed his Lord in a soft voice
19|4|Said, "Lord! My bones have weakened and my head has lit up with the gray hair (of old age). I haven´t so far been denied anything I ever prayed to You for
19|5|I am concerned for my followers after my death. My wife is barren. But, please Lord! Grant me by Your grace a successor (son)
19|6|One who may inherit from me and from the family of Yaqub, and Lord, please let him be amongst those with whom You are well-pleased
19|7|Oh Zakaria, We give you the good news of a son. His name shall be Yahya! Never before have We created anyone with his kind of qualities
19|8|Said, "Lord! How could I have a son now? My wife is barren and I have attained a ripe old age
19|9|Said, "That shall be!" Your Lord said, "This is really easy for Me! I also gave you existence earlier when you were nothing
19|10|Said, "Lord! Assign a sign for me." Said, "Despite being healthy, you shall be unable to speak for three days. That shall be your sign
19|11|He emerged from the chamber, and gestured to his followers asking them to sing the praises (of Allah), morning and evening
19|12|Oh Yahya! Hold on to the book with all your might!" We gave him the wisdom even as a lad
19|13|And by Our grace, We granted him compassion and purity; he was pious
19|14|He was devoted and kind to his parents; not defiant or arrogant
19|15|Peace be upon him, the day he was born! The day he died! And the day he shall be brought back to life
19|16|And mention Mary in your narration. Once she excused herself from her family and retired to the eastern wing of the house
19|17|She drew the curtain behind her and there, We sent Our spirit (angel) to her! It appeared before her in the figure of a full grown man
19|18|She cried out, "I seek the protection of Rehman (the Merciful) from you, if you are a God-fearing person
19|19|He said, "What I am, is a messenger of your Lord to bestow upon you a pious son
19|20|Said, "How might I have a son? No man has ever touched me, nor am I a woman of loose morals
19|21|Said "It shall be! Your Lord says ´It is really too easy for Me´! It is preordained and shall come to pass, so as to make him a sign for the humankind and a blessing from Us´
19|22|She conceived and moved to a place far away
19|23|The distress of labor brought her under a date-palm tree. She said to herself, "I wish I was dead, long gone and forgotten before this ever happened
19|24|He (the angel) called her from close by, "Do not feel sorry for yourself. Your Lord has issued forth a spring right close to where you are
19|25|Shake the trunk of the date tree. Moist ripe dates will break loose and fall down
19|26|Eat, drink and stay calm. Should any one happen to pass by, tell him you are observing a fast for the sake of Rehman, (the Merciful), and hence shall not talk to anyone
19|27|She returned to her folks carrying him (the baby). They said, "Oh Mary! What an unprecedented act have you committed
19|28|Oh sister of Haroon! Your father was not wicked! Nor was your mother a loose woman
19|29|She pointed towards the infant. They said, "How can we converse with an infant lying in a crib
19|30|The infant said, "I am the servant of Allah! He appointed me His messenger, and granted me the gospel
19|31|He blessed me wherever I might happen to be, and has ordered me to enjoin the ´salat´ and the ´zakat´ as long as I am alive
19|32|(I am) devoted to my mother, not hapless and arrogant
19|33|Peace upon me the day I was born. The day I shall die. And the day I shall be brought back to life
19|34|Such was Jesus, the son of Mary! This is the real truth about him, which they dispute
19|35|It is not befitting of Allah to have a son. Exalted is He! Having decided the matter, He merely tells it, "Be!" Hence it becomes
19|36|Indeed, Allah is my Lord as well as your Lord! So worship Him. That is the straight path
19|37|Groups have disputed amongst themselves regarding the day (of judgment). Witnessing that great day shall be disastrous for those who deny its coming
19|38|On the day they shall come to Us, their vision and hearing shall be sharper! Today the evil-doers are clearly lost in their misguidance
19|39|Warn them of the regretful embarrassment of the day when the matter shall be decided and put to rest! Today they are in heedless and neglectful denial, and they do not believe
19|40|We shall inherit the earth, including all that is upon it. Towards Us they all shall return
19|41|And mention Ibraheem in the book; he was a truthful person and a prophet
19|42|He said to his father, "Oh Father! Why do you worship that which neither sees, nor hears, nor can protect you from anything
19|43|Oh Father, true knowledge did not come to you, but has come to me. So follow me, I shall lead you along the balanced path
19|44|Oh Father, do not obey Shaitan. Indeed, Shaitan is disobedient to Rehman
19|45|I am worried, Oh Father, that a great torment might fall upon you from Rehman, and that you might end up as a comrade of Shaitan
19|46|He said, "Have you turned away from your gods, oh Ibraheem? Desist, for if you do not, I shall stone you to death. Out of my sight, now
19|47|Said, "Peace be upon you. I shall ask my Lord to forgive you. He is really very kind to me
19|48|I hereby wash my hands of you, and those you call gods besides Allah. I will worship my Lord! I am confident, If I pray to Him, I shall not be deprived
19|49|After he abandoned them along with those whom they called gods beside Allah, We gave him Ishaq and Yaqub. We appointed each of them a prophet
19|50|We showered Our blessings upon them and gave them high honor
19|51|And mention Musa in the book. He was really chosen, a prophet and a messenger
19|52|We called him out from the right side of the mountain Toor, and pulled him close, so as to grant him a private audience
19|53|And We gave his brother, Haroon, to him as a prophet, a blessing from Us
19|54|And mention Ismail in the book. Indeed, he was true to his words, a prophet and a messenger
19|55|He obligated ´salat´ and ´zakat´ upon his family. In the eyes of his Lord, he was an adorable person
19|56|And in the book, mention Idrees. Indeed, he was a truthful person and a prophet
19|57|We raised him to an exalted status
19|58|These are the ones Allah showered His blessings upon. These prophets were the descendants of Adam, and the descendants of those We boarded on the boat with Nooh. They were the descendants of Ibraheem and Ismail. Those were the ones We picked for Our guidance! Such were they that when Our verses were recited to them, they fell prostrate on the ground, tears welling up in their eyes
19|59|They were succeeded by ignorant ones, those who squandered their "salat´ and followed their whims and the pleasures of the flesh. Their just deserts shall soon catch up with them
19|60|Except those who repent, believe, and perform good deeds. They will enter paradise. They will not be dealt with unfairly
19|61|Rehman has promised this paradise to His servants for eternity, in exchange for their belief in the unseen. Surely His promise will be fulfilled
19|62|In it, they shall hear nothing vulgar; only peace! There, each day and each night, their due portion (sustenance) shall be delivered to them
19|63|Such is the paradise, which We will allow only Our pious servants to inherit
19|64|(Angels said), "We descend only when ordered by your Lord. To Him belongs all that lies before us, behind us, and in between. Your Lord is not the One to forget
19|65|He is the sustainer of the heavens and the earth, and all else in between. So worship Him in steadfast obedience. Do you know any other comparable to Him
19|66|(Yet), man says "When I am dead, will I emerge back to life again
19|67|Does man not recall? It was We Who created him earlier, when he was nothing
19|68|By your Lord! Very definitely! We shall gather them and the Shaitans together. Then, certainly, We shall collect them all around the hellfire, in a manner that they shall be crawling on their knees
19|69|Thereafter, We shall definitely bring forth from each group of people the one who had been the most ardent and rebellious opponent of Rehman
19|70|Of course, We know very well who amongst them deserves to burn in hell
19|71|There isn´t any of you who can avoid passing by the hellfire. Your Lord has made this incumbent upon Himself
19|72|Then, We will let the transgressors fall tumbling down into it, but We will rescue those who have been heedful and pious
19|73|When Our clear lucid verses are recited, those who disbelieve the verses taunt those who believe by saying, "Which of the two of us has a better abode, and enjoys and mingles with better and more distinguished company
19|74|Many groups have We destroyed prior to them. They were better equipped, better furnished and better in appearance
19|75|Say, "Rehman gives leeway to those who indulge in gross negligence until they get to see that which is promised to be their lot, either the punishment (in this world) or the hour (of judgment)! They would soon realise whose status is lower! Whose allies are weaker
19|76|Allah increases in guidance those who are on the straight path, and the results of their good deeds are better with Allah in terms of rewards and consequences
19|77|Did you see the one who has chosen to deny Our signs and yet says, "I shall definitely be granted wealth and children
19|78|Has he peeked into the unseen? or has he entered into a contract with Rehman
19|79|Indeed not! Rather, We are recording everything he says. We shall extend his punishment a great deal further
19|80|We shall repossess all that he owns. And We shall bring him out all alone
19|81|They have taken gods other than Allah, so that they may have supporters
19|82|No! Indeed, their false gods will disown their worship, and they will become adversaries
19|83|Do you not notice? We send the Shaitans upon the disbelievers, and they continually incite and instigate them
19|84|Do not be impatient with them. We are counting down their days
19|85|That day, We will gather the pious (God-fearing) as guests of Rehman
19|86|While the sinners will be like thirst-stricken animals, whom We will shove towards the hellfire
19|87|No one has the ability to intervene, except those whom Rehman has promised
19|88|What? Do they say Rehman (God) has a son
19|89|They have surely brought forth a grave thing
19|90|So grave, indeed, that it may cause the earth to explode into pieces! Or the mountains may come tumbling down! Or the heavens might just crack asunder
19|91|They have dared to assign a son for Rehman
19|92|It is not befitting for Rehman to have a son
19|93|Every being in the heavens and on the earth shall come before Rehman as a slave
19|94|He is aware of their exact number, and He has counted them all up
19|95|On the Day of Judgment, each of them shall arrive all alone, and shall be on his own
19|96|And of course, Rehman will instill with love, the hearts of those who believe and do the righteous deeds
19|97|We have made this (Quran) easy for you, in your own language, in order that you may give the glad tidings to the pious and the God-fearing. With it, you may warn those that are belligerent
19|98|Many a people have We destroyed before them. So now, can you sense even a faint sign of their existence, or hear even a wisp of their tale
20|1|Ta, Ha
20|2|We have revealed to you this Qur´an, not to cause you distress
20|3|Rather, it is a memorandum _ (an advisory) _ for the one who fears
20|4|A communiqué from the Creator of the earth and the celestial heavens
20|5|Rehman, (the most magnificent), mounted the throne (and governs the universe majestically)
20|6|To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and on the earth, whatever lies between them, and whatever exists under (the surface of the earth)
20|7|You call Him out loud. (But remember), He knows even the most intimate thoughts _ thoughts that remain hidden (and unexpressed) forever
20|8|He is Allah! There is no god but He; His are all the beautiful names
20|9|Is the story of Musa known to you
20|10|When he spotted a campfire, he said to his family, "I notice a fire! Perhaps, I can bring a live coal from there (to start our own fire), or obtain directions (for the road ahead)
20|11|When he approached (the site of) the campfire, We called out to him, "Oh Musa
20|12|It is I, your Lord! Take your shoes off! You happen to be in the holy valley of Toah
20|13|I chose you! So listen to what is being revealed
20|14|Indeed, I am the One _ Allah! There is no god except Me! So obey Me and establish the ´salat´ (prayers) to remember Me
20|15|In fact, the hour (of Judgment) is sure to arrive! I want to keep (its time) undisclosed, so that every soul may be rewarded in accordance with its efforts
20|16|Hence, Do not ever let an unbeliever _ the one following his own whims _ dissuade you from it (the belief in the afterlife), lest you perish
20|17|And what is that (you hold) in your right (hand), oh Musa
20|18|Said, "It is my stick. I lean on it to rest my weight, and with it I chop off the leaves to feed my cattle. It also has other uses for me
20|19|Said, "Throw it down, Oh Musa
20|20|So he threw it down, and all of a sudden, it became a snake creeping around (swiftly)
20|21|(Allah) said, "Grab it, and do not be afraid. We will change it back to its earlier state
20|22|And place your hand in your armpit. (As you pull your hand out) it will appear dazzling white without any discomfort. Another sign
20|23|To show you (but just two of) Our great signs
20|24|Go to the pharaoh! He has exceeded (every) limit
20|25|(Musa) said, "Lord, unlock my heart
20|26|And make my task easy for me
20|27|And correct my speech impediment
20|28|(So) they understand my words
20|29|And appoint one of my family members (as an aide) to help me
20|30|My brother, Haroon
20|31|With him, bolster my strength
20|32|And make him a partner in my mission
20|33|So, we may glorify You a lot
20|34|And talk about You a lot
20|35|And certainly, You are watching over us
20|36|Said, "You are being granted your requests, oh Musa
20|37|We, in fact, conferred favors upon you at other times, too
20|38|When We inspired your mother by implanting an idea in her mind
20|39|(Saying) "Put (the child) in a box and push (the box) down the river. It will hurl (the box) ashore, where Our enemy _ his and Mine _ will pick him up." I bestowed love upon you, so you may be raised under My watchful eye
20|40|(Remember) when your sister walked (along the box) and said to those who found the child, "Shall I guide you to a wet nurse for him?" Thus We sent you back to your mother, to soothe her and to keep her from grieving. Then you killed a man. We rescued you from that distress. We had you go through a terrible ordeal. You lived with the people of Madyan a number of years. And now, you have arrived here at just the right (preordained) time
20|41|Oh Musa, I have selected you specifically for My sake
20|42|So proceed with My signs, both of you _ you and your brother. Do not become lax in remembering Me
20|43|Go to the pharaoh! Indeed, he has transgressed
20|44|But speak to him in an affable manner. Maybe he will heed, and fear (Allah)
20|45|They said, "Our Lord! We are afraid that he will let loose his rage upon us and will oppress us
20|46|Said, "Have no fear! I am with you, watching over and listening
20|47|So go to him and say, "We are the messengers of your Lord! Therefore, let the Israelites go with us and do not torture them. We have already brought you the proof from your Lord! Peace is upon him, who follows the guidance
20|48|Indeed, it has been revealed to us that punishment awaits the one who denies and turns away
20|49|(The pharaoh) asked, "So then, who is your Lord, oh Musa
20|50|Said, "The One Who gave each (existing) thing its nature and form, then guided it along
20|51|(The pharaoh) asked, "Then, what about the generations of yester years
20|52|Musa said, "The facts about them are known to my Lord and recorded in a book. He neither errs nor forgets
20|53|The same One Who made the earth your (safe) haven, carved roads in it for you, and sent water down from the sky." With that (water), We bring out vegetation of many diverse kinds
20|54|Eat! And feed your cattle, too. Indeed, in it is a sign for those who (accept) reason
20|55|We created you from this (very) earth. Into it We shall have you return, and from it We shall bring you out a second time
20|56|Surely, We had him look at all Our signs, but he rejected (them all) and refused (to believe)
20|57|(The pharaoh) said, "Are you here to drive us out of our land with your magic, oh Musa
20|58|And added, "Of course, we can perform that kind of magic too. So, go ahead! For our encounter pick a time and place _ a neutral location (accessible to all). We will not fail to show up. Nor should you
20|59|(Musa) said, "Let the coming festival day be the appointed date, and let the people gather at high noon
20|60|So, the pharaoh withdrew and with craftiness, put together a scheme, and then he arrived
20|61|Musa said to them. "Woe unto you! Do not make up lies against Allah. He will annihilate you (all) with a torment. Whoever invents lies against Allah fails
20|62|At that point, they began to dispute among themselves and held secret talks
20|63|At length they said, "These two are just magicians trying to evict you from your land by their spells. They want to deprive you of your exemplary way of life
20|64|So rally all your tricks, then act in unison. Whoever triumphs today will prosper
20|65|They said, "Oh Musa, either you cast (your spell) first, or else let us be the first to cast (the spell)
20|66|(Musa) said, "No! You go first. Then suddenly, because of their spell, it appeared to him that their ropes and sticks (were snakes and) were creeping about swiftly
20|67|A sense of fear came over Musa
20|68|We said, "Do not be afraid. You will be the one to triumph, for sure
20|69|Throw down the stick in your right hand. It will gobble up the spell they have cast. What they have conjured up is only a trick of the magicians, and magicians never succeed when they come (to face the truth)
20|70|The magicians lost out, threw themselves down on the ground prostrate, and said, "We accept the Lord of Haroon and Musa
20|71|The pharaoh said, "You believed him, even though I did not permit you? Obviously, he is your master who has taught you the magic! Now, I will definitely chop off your hands and feet on opposite sides and then crucify you on the trunk of the date-palm tree. You will soon know which one of us awards the severer and the more lasting punishment
20|72|They said, "In the face of the clear signs that have come to us, we will not prefer you to the One Who has created us. So do whatever you decree. Surely, you exercise control (only) in the life of this world
20|73|We have really believed in our Lord! So He may forgive our sins, as well as the magic you compelled us to perform. Allah is better, and the Immortal
20|74|Indeed, hell is for the one who comes to his Lord as a criminal. There, he will never die _ nor live
20|75|The exalted ranks are for those who come to their Lord as believers, having done righteous deeds
20|76|(As also) the elevated gardens, through which run the rivers. There, they shall live forever! This is the reward for those who endeavor to purify themselves
20|77|Indeed, We revealed to Musa, "Go and take My servants with you. Strike a dry path through the sea. Do not be frightened of being overtaken (by the Pharaoh in hot pursuit), nor be afraid (of the sea)
20|78|The pharaoh pursued them with his army. They were drowned by that which engulfed them from all sides
20|79|The pharaoh led his nation astray _ did not guide well
20|80|Oh Children of Israel! We rescued you from your enemy, granted you an audience by the right side of the mountain ´Toor´, and sent down the ´munna´ and the ´salwa´ for you
20|81|Eat the wholesome food We have provided, but do not be overly excessive. Else, My wrath will come down upon you. Surely, the one upon whom lands My fury, comes tumbling down
20|82|Yet, undoubtedly, I am the One Who grants forgiveness to anyone who repents, believes and acts righteously; and then stays steadfast (till death)
20|83|(Allah asked), "What made you come (to Me) ahead of your people, oh Musa
20|84|Said, "They´re coming right behind. I hurried towards You, Lord, so You may be pleased
20|85|(Allah) said, "After you left, We subjected your people to a test. Saamari led them astray
20|86|So Musa returned to his nation, angry and aggrieved, and said, "Oh my people, did your Lord not make you excellent promises? Has it been too long for you? Or do you just want the fury of your Lord to land on you? Is that why you broke your pledge with me
20|87|They said, "We did not willfully opt to break our promise to you. In fact, the burden of carrying people´s jewelry had worn us down. So we unloaded it (into the fire). Likewise, Saamari threw it down, too
20|88|Then, he shaped the gold into the figure of a calf, and it mooed like one! People cried out, "This is your God. The God of Musa. He forgot (to mention it)
20|89|Did they not see that it did not respond to them at all? Nor did it have the ability to hurt them, or help them
20|90|Even though Haroon had told them earlier, "Oh my people! You are being tested with it (the calf). Really, your Lord is the most Merciful. So follow me, all of you! And obey my command
20|91|They said, "We will not quit worshipping (the calf) until Musa comes back
20|92|Musa (when he returned) said, "Oh Haroon, when you saw them going astray, what held you back
20|93|Why did you not follow me? Did you disobey my instructions
20|94|Haroon said, "Oh son of my mother! Do not tug at my beard, nor pull my hair! I was afraid you would blame me and say ´You caused a split among the Israelites, and did not follow my instruction.´
20|95|Said, "And what about you, Oh Saamari
20|96|(Saamari) said, "I realized what others failed to. So I collected a handful (of dust) from the footmarks of the prophets and tossed it on the calf. That is what my self prompted me to do
20|97|(Musa) said, "Go! This is (the punishment) for you: in this life you will (continually) utter ´Do not touch me´, and you have an appointment (in the afterlife) which you cannot skip. Now watch that god of yours, upon whose worship you insisted. We will surely melt it down, then scatter it around in the ocean
20|98|As a matter of fact, Allah (alone) is your God! Besides Him there is no other god, and His knowledge extends over all things
20|99|Thus, We narrate to you the tales of what went on earlier. We have granted you this (book of) advisement from Ourselves
20|100|Indeed, those ignoring it shall bear a burdensome punishment on the Day of Judgment
20|101|They shall forever remain in it _ (that condition of torment). Baneful shall be their burden on the Day of Judgment
20|102|The day the trumpet sounds will be the day We will gather the criminals, their eyes agape with fright
20|103|Among themselves they will whisper, "You stayed (on the earth) only ten days
20|104|Of course We know very well what they shall say. The most accurate among them will say, "You stayed there for just a day
20|105|They are asking you about the mountains. Tell them, "My Lord will blow them up into fine dust
20|106|He will turn (this earth) into a plain wasteland
20|107|You will not find any ridges or cracks on it
20|108|On that day, they will (meekly) respond to the convener _ (the angel) _ who shall face no hindrance. In the presence of Rehman, voices will drop to a subdued hush. You shall hear nothing but faint whispers
20|109|That day, mediation shall benefit no one, unless Rehman grants permission, and about whom He pleases to hear (favorable) remarks
20|110|He knows all that lies ahead of them as well as everything about their past. Others do not know at all
20|111|All heads will bow before the Eternally Alive and the Ever-lasting. Anyone carrying a burden of having committed an injustice shall fail miserably
20|112|(Whereas) those who had acted righteously _ provided they had believed _ shall have no fear of being wronged or short changed
20|113|Thus, We revealed this Qur´an in Arabic. In it We have defined sharply the promises and the threats. Maybe they will fear (Allah), or it _ (the Qur´an) _ will bring back the remembrance (of Allah)
20|114|Allah, the Genuine Emperor, is the most Exalted! Do not be in a hurry to repeat (the fresh verses of) the Qur´an before the revelations conclude. Say, "Lord, enhance me in knowledge
20|115|Earlier, We had entrusted Adam with a task, but his memory lapsed. We did not find in him the firmness of resolve
20|116|(Remember)! We said to the angels, "Fall down prostrate before Adam!" And they all fell prostrate, except Iblees (Shaitan). He refused
20|117|So We said, "Oh Adam, that one, surely, is your and your wife´s enemy. Now do not let him drive you out of paradise, lest you feel distressed
20|118|Of course, here (in paradise), it is your (privilege) that you do not go hungry, nor are you unclad
20|119|And here you are not thirsty, troubled by the (sultry sweltering) sun
20|120|Yet Shaitan whispered (and aroused) doubts in his mind saying, "Oh Adam, shall I show you the tree of immortality, and the domain that has no demise
20|121|Both of them _ (Adam and his wife) _ ate its fruit and their genitalia became visible to them. With the leaves of the Garden of Eden they began to cover themselves. Adam disobeyed his Lord and went astray
20|122|Later, his Lord favored him, granted him forgiveness and guided him
20|123|(Allah) said, "Get down from here! Both of you _ (Adam and Shaitan)! You are each other´s enemy. Whoever follows the guidance _ when the guidance from Me arrives _ will not go astray, and will not be miserable
20|124|While a wretched (unwholesome) livelihood will be the lot of the one who turns away from My advice and warning. He will be blind when We round him up on the Day of Judgment
20|125|He shall say, "Lord, why did You raise me blind? I used to be endowed with eyesight
20|126|Allah will say, "Much the same as you ignored My signs when they came to you! Befittingly, today you are being ignored
20|127|This is how We chastise the one who exceeds the bounds, and ignores the signs of his Lord. The punishment of the afterlife is far worse and ever persisting
20|128|Many towns have We destroyed before them. Did that fact not teach them? They walk through those ruins! There are surely signs in it for those with intellect
20|129|The word of your Lord has been proclaimed! Had it not been, and if it wasn´t essential and for a specific period, (then their doom and demise would be instant)
20|130|Therefore, with patience bear their remarks and chant the praises of your Lord before the sun rises, before it sets, and during the night. Glorify Him in the morning and evening. Perhaps you will feel contented
20|131|Do not look (enviously) at the splendors of this life with which We have furnished some of their groups. It is (merely) to test them. The grants of your Lord (in the afterlife) are far better and ever lasting
20|132|Bid your family to observe the ´salat´, and stay steadfast upon it yourself. We do not seek sustenance from you. Indeed, We bestow sustenance. The final outcome hinges on piety
20|133|They say, "Why did he not bring us a sign?" Did clear proofs _ those narrated in the earlier scriptures _ not reach them
20|134|Had We, prior to sending him (Muhammad, SAW), ruined them with a disaster, they would have complained, "Our Lord, if only You had sent us a messenger, we would have followed Your signs instead of being disgraced and humiliated
20|135|Say, "Each (soul) is in a state of waiting. You wait, too! Soon you will find out who is on the right path, and well-guided
21|1|Their reckoning has drawn closer, but people are turning away in unmindful ignorance
21|2|When a fresh narrative from their Lord reaches them, they (barely) hear it, then they resume their pastimes
21|3|Their minds absorbed in pleasures, the evil doers whisper under their breaths, "Isn´t he just a human being like you all? Will you then, succumb to his magic knowingly
21|4|The messenger said, "My Lord knows everything uttered in the heavens and on earth. He is the All-hearing and the All-knowing
21|5|And they said, "Vague meaningless dreams, or he has made it up, or he is a poet. Else, let him present to us a miracle like the earlier (messengers) did
21|6|Those towns _ the ones We destroyed in the past _ had also failed to believe. So now, will they believe
21|7|We have always commissioned men (as messengers) and sent revelations to them, even before your time. Should you not know (this fact), ask the people of the scriptures
21|8|We did not fashion their physiques, so as to enable them to live without food, nor did they live forever
21|9|Then, We fulfilled Our pledge and rescued them, and those whom We wished. We destroyed those who had exceeded their limits
21|10|We have sent you this book. In it are narrations about your own self. So why do you not understand
21|11|Many towns have We dashed into fragments. They were evil! Then We brought other nations in their place
21|12|When they experienced Our power, they suddenly began to flee
21|13|Do not run away! Return to your homes and the luxurious comforts you were given. You will be called (to account)
21|14|They said, "Misery to us! We surely were evil
21|15|They kept saying that right until We turned them into the plucked out harvest
21|16|We did not create the heavens and the earth and everything in between as an amusement (and a pastime)
21|17|Had We wanted just to have fun, and if We were (given to) doing that, We would have done so all by Ourselves
21|18|On the contrary, We run the truth against falsehood, over which it triumphs. In time, the falsehood is bound to come to naught! Misery to you for what you attribute
21|19|Every living being in the heavens and on earth belongs to Him, and no one in His presence _ either out of pride or regret _ shies away from worshipping Him
21|20|All day and all night, they chant His praises. They do not relent
21|21|Have they accepted other gods on the earth? Do those other gods bring the dead back to life
21|22|The heavens and the earth would run into chaos had there been other gods beside Allah. Exalted is Allah, the Lord of the heavenly throne, far above what they utter
21|23|He is not answerable for His actions, while all others are (to Him)
21|24|Have they accepted other gods beside Him? Say, "Present your proof! Here is this reminder (the Qur´an) for those with me, and there are the scriptures for those before me." Most people actually do not know the truth, and so they ignore
21|25|Never was there a messenger before you to whom We did not reveal, "There is no god except Me, so worship Me (exclusively)
21|26|They say, "Rehman has adopted a son!" Glorified is He! Rather, they are all (just His) honored servants
21|27|They dare not initiate an audience with Him, and they diligently carry out His orders
21|28|He knows everything that lies ahead of them and everything about their past. They do not intercede for anyone except for those He is pleased with. They are attentive! And stand in awe and reverence of Him
21|29|We will award hell to anyone amongst them who says, "I am a god besides Him." That is how We punish the transgressors
21|30|Do the unbelievers not consider the fact that the heavens and the earth were joined together? We split them asunder! And from water, We created every living being! Do they not believe (that)
21|31|We pitched mountains firmly on the earth, lest it makes them sway. (Between the mountains) We cut roads and paths, so they may find their way
21|32|And (for you), We deemed the sky to be a safe and secure ceiling. Yet, these are the signs they overlook
21|33|And He is the One Who created the night and the day, and the sun and the moon. Each is afloat in its orbit
21|34|We have never bestowed immortality upon any human, including you, (Oh Muhammad, SAW). So you will die! But will they live forever
21|35|Every living being must taste death! We put you through trials, and We test all of you with (different) things _ bad as well as good! Then, towards Us, you shall all return
21|36|When the unbelievers see you, they treat you with scorn, (saying), "Is he the one who speaks (ill) of our gods?" While they themselves are such a sort that they refuse to accept any mention of Rehman
21|37|Man is created hasty. Very soon, I will have you see My signs! Do not be in such haste
21|38|And they say, "If you are truthful, tell us. When will that promise (of the afterlife) come about
21|39|If the unbelievers could only imagine the moment when they will struggle in vain to ward off the fire from their faces and their backs! They shall have no help
21|40|It will come upon them all of a sudden, and it will bewilder them. They will be unable to turn it away, and they shall have no respite (another chance)
21|41|During earlier times, too, they made fun of the messengers. But the mockery came back to haunt (and surround) those who used to mock
21|42|Say, "Who will watch over you during the night and the day, and protect you against (the wrath of) Rehman?" No! In fact, they turn away from the remembrance of their Lord
21|43|Or do they have other gods to guard them against Us? Those ´gods´ are unable to help even their own selves. Nor can they be guarded against Us
21|44|Rather, We had them and their forefathers enjoy (life) till they grew old. Do they not notice? We keep on shrinking the land from all sides. So then, can they triumph
21|45|Say, "The fact is, by this revelation I warn you!" But the deaf do not hear what they are being warned against
21|46|Even if a whiff of Our punishment were to hit them, they would surely cry out, "Oh misery to us, we were indeed the evil doers
21|47|We will indeed bring out the scales of justice on the Day of Judgment. No soul shall be wronged a bit. We will bring out (into focus) all deeds, even those (insignificant enough to be) worth a tiny bit of a mustard seed. And Our presence shall suffice to hold the reckoning
21|48|We had indeed granted Musa and Haroon the proof, the illuminating light and the (right) advice for those who fear
21|49|Those who fear their unseen Lord and dread the hour of judgment
21|50|This (Qur´an), now, is the blessed narration We have sent! So then, are you refusing to acknowledge it
21|51|Much earlier, We granted Ibraheem the maturity of mind
21|52|When he once said to his father and his people, "What are these statues you are worshipping so devoutly
21|53|They replied, "We found our forefathers praying to them
21|54|Said, "Surely, you and your forefathers were gravely misguided
21|55|They said, "Are you expressing your real views or are you just kidding
21|56|Indeed not! Your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the One Who brought them into being. I bear witness to this (Truth)
21|57|Said, "I swear by Allah, I have plans for your idols when you go away and leave them
21|58|So he battered them to pieces, except the one most prominent. Maybe they would turn to it
21|59|They said, "Who did this to our gods? He is really very cruel
21|60|Some said, "We heard a lad called Ibraheem talking about them
21|61|They said, "Bring him out to face the people. So they may observe (his fate)
21|62|They asked, "Did you do that to our gods, oh Ibraheem
21|63|Said, "Rather, this one, their chief did that! Therefore, ask them if they can talk
21|64|They felt a pinch of conscience and (their inner voice) said, "Really, it is you who is being unjust
21|65|But they brushed that thought aside and said, "Of course, they do not talk! And you know it
21|66|He said, "Why then do you worship those besides Allah. They grant you no benefits, nor inflict any harm
21|67|Damn you, and those you worship beside Allah! Do you not understand at all
21|68|They cried, "Burn him at the stake! Rush to the aid of your gods! Act, if you will
21|69|We commanded, "Oh fire, simmer down, and let there be peace upon Ibraheem
21|70|They wanted to hurt him, but We caused them to be the real losers
21|71|Towards the blessed land, We had him and Loot escape. We had blessed it for the whole world
21|72|We gave Ibraheem a present: a son, Ishaq and (the grandson), Yaqub. We made each of them righteous
21|73|We made them both the patriarch _the leaders. As per Our instructions, they guided their people, and We revealed to them the acts of righteousness: the establishing of ´salat´ and the paying of "zakat". Both of them were Our devotees
21|74|As for Loot, We gave him wisdom and knowledge and rescued him from the people who committed the gravest of sins. They were indeed a very evil people
21|75|We admitted (Loot) into Our mercy; he was amongst the righteous
21|76|And prior to that, Nooh prayed to Us and We responded. We saved him and his family from a great torment
21|77|We came to his aid against a nation that had denied Our signs. They were an evil people, indeed. So We drowned them all _ every single one of them
21|78|And don´t forget Daood and Sulaiman as they sat in judgment, hearing the case of the field that had been overrun at night by goats of other folks. We were overseeing their judgment
21|79|We unveiled (the right ruling) to Sulaiman. We had granted wisdom and courage to both. For Daood, We had tamed the mountains and the birds. They used to chant praises with him! It was We Who did that
21|80|It was We Who taught him the art of making metal armors for you, so you may shield yourself during battles. But then, are you grateful
21|81|And for Sulaiman, (We tamed) the violent winds. Upon his orders they rushed towards the land We had blessed. We have the knowledge of all things
21|82|Groups of Shaitans (those We tamed), used to sea dive for him. Besides that, they performed other duties for him. We were the guardian over them
21|83|(And also) Ayub! He called his Lord, "An agony has befallen me while You are absolutely the most Merciful of all who show mercy
21|84|We heard his prayers, relieved him of his agony and reunited him with his family. We increased his family as a blessing from Us, and as an inducement for the worshippers
21|85|And (We also heard) Ismail, Idrees and Dhul Qifl. They were all patient men
21|86|And We admitted them into Our mercy. They were all righteous
21|87|And remember the one (who is well known because) of the fish. He left his town in exasperation, and he thought that We would fail to take him to task. Eventually, from the darkness he called, "There is no god but You. Exalted are You! Surely I was the offender
21|88|We responded and relieved his grief. That is how We relieve the believers
21|89|Zakaria called his Lord, (saying), "Lord, do not leave me alone (child less). You are the best of those who receive the heritage
21|90|We responded and granted him Yahya. We remedied (the condition of) his wife! All these (messengers) eagerly rushed towards the righteous acts, and prayed to Us with fear and longing. They all were humbly submissive to Us
21|91|(As also) that lady who had guarded her virginity. We breathed Our spirit into her body, and turned her and her son into a sign for the world
21|92|Listen! This human race of yours is really a single nation and I am your Lord, so worship Me exclusively
21|93|But they divided up their beliefs (and devotion) amongst themselves. All must return to Us
21|94|The efforts of anyone who performed the righteous acts _ provided he is a believer _ will not go unrecognized. Indeed, We are writing (everything) down
21|95|And forbidden it is for the town We have destroyed to bounce back
21|96|Until (the time), the ´Yajog´ and the ´Majog´ are let loose. They will begin to spring out from every hill
21|97|As the promise of that certainty _ (the reckoning) _ looms closer, the eyes of the unbelievers will be glazed and agape (with horror). They will cry out, "Oh misery to us, we stayed unmindful of this. Rather, we were the evil doers
21|98|Indeed! You, and those you used to worship besides Allah, shall serve as fuel for the hellfire, which you shall have to enter
21|99|Had they been gods, they would not end up here (in hell). Now, they shall stay here forever
21|100|There, wheezing (amid moans and shrieks) shall be their mode of breathing. In hell, they shall not hear anything (else)
21|101|But those, for whom the decree of joy and happiness had been issued by Us, will be spared the above fate
21|102|(In paradise), they shall not hear even the faint whimper of hell. Amid what they desire and yearn, they shall live for ever
21|103|That great anxiety will not afflict them. The angels will greet them (saying), "Today is your day, the one you had been promised
21|104|That day We will fold up the heavens like pages folded in a book. Then, We will begin the creation anew just as We had started it in the first instance. This is a promise incumbent upon Us. We are definitely going to fulfill (Our promise)
21|105|We, in fact, revealed in the "Zaboor" _ (the book revealed to Da´ood) _ following Our warnings, that only My righteous servants shall inherit the earth
21|106|In that, surely, is the message for the nation that prays
21|107|We have sent you only as mercy for the entire world
21|108|Say, "It has been revealed to me that your God, for sure, is that One true God. So then, are you ready to submit, and obey
21|109|If they turn their backs, say, "I have notified you _ all of you, together. I have no idea whether that which is being promised to you, (the day of Reckoning), is close by or far in the future
21|110|Of course, He knows that which is spoken aloud, as well as the thoughts you conceal
21|111|I do not know. It (the respite) maybe a trial for you, or else an enjoyment for a brief while
21|112|(Eventually), the messengers said, "Lord! Pass Your infallible verdict! And our Lord, the Beneficent, is our Advocate against every lie you utter
22|1|Oh you people! Fear your Lord! Indeed, the jolt of that hour (of Judgment) is a terrible thing
22|2|On that day _ (the Day of Judgment) _ you will see every breast feeding mother oblivious of her suckling infant! Every pregnant female would abort her fetus! And people would appear to be drunk although they would not be drunk! The punishment of Allah would indeed be that severe
22|3|Some people argue about Allah, although they have no knowledge. They tag along every defiant Shaitan
22|4|About whom it has been decreed, that he will lead astray anyone who abides by him, and that he will steer his flock straight into the torment of hellfire
22|5|Oh you people! Should you be in doubt about the resurrection, consider this: it is We Who created you (first) from dust and then (in stages) from semen to a clinging clot of blood, and then to a small chunk of flesh _ formed as well as unformed. (We tell you this) in order to explain to you the truth. In the womb, We keep installed whomever We want for a fixed time. Then, We bring you out as an infant, and let you obtain your full potential. Some of you die young while others are diverted to the age of weakness (and senility) _ the age when (once again) they know nothing after having learnt a few things. You observe the land dry and barren. Then, as soon as We send rain water down (it comes alive), it stirs, swells up and starts producing all sorts of delightful vegetation
22|6|That is so because Allah is the absolute Reality! And because He grants life back to the dead! He is capable of accomplishing everything
22|7|(Because it proves) that the hour of judgment is surely bound to come! No doubt about that! And that Allah will resurrect all (the dead) in their graves
22|8|Some people argue about Allah, although they do not have any knowledge, guidance or an illuminating book
22|9|Arching their necks conceitedly, they misguide people and drive them away from the path of Allah. Disgrace awaits them in this life, and on the Day of Judgment We shall have them taste the torture by fire
22|10|This is what your own hands have wrought. Surely, Allah does not oppress His servants
22|11|There are some people who worship Allah, but stay on the sidelines. If something good happens to them they are contented. But as soon as they are placed in a situation of trial, they undergo an about face and turn away. They lose out in this world, and also in the next! That, surely is a real loss
22|12|Instead of Allah, they pray to such deities that can inflict no harm, and award no benefits. That is surely the worst kind of misguidance
22|13|They pray to the one whose harm outweighs the benefits. Evil, indeed, is such a patron, and evil is such a companion
22|14|Allah will surely admit those who believe and act righteously into paradise. Rivers run right through it. Allah does what He wills
22|15|If anyone thinks that Allah will fail to help him (Muhammad, SAW) in this life and in the afterlife, then let that someone stretch his means to reach the heavens and traverse it. Let him see if his tricks can negate anything, including that which angers him
22|16|Thus, We send down the revealing verses. Surely, Allah guides whomever He wants
22|17|On the Day of the Judgment, Allah will surely settle the differences between the believers on the one hand, and the Jews, the Sabians, the Christians and the polytheists on the other. Allah is the Witness to all things
22|18|Do you not observe that everyone (and everything) in the heavens and on the earth falls prostrate before Allah: the sun and the moon, the stars and the mountains, the trees and the beasts, and a lot of people, too! Punishment has become warranted for many others (who do not prostrate). There is no honor for the one whom Allah humiliates. Undoubtedly, Allah does what He wills
22|19|These are the two rival groups _ (those who prostrate before Allah, and those who do not). They disagree about Allah. Garments made from fire have been readied for the unbelievers. Boiling water will be poured over their heads
22|20|Their skins and (even) their insides will melt away
22|21|Steel clubs shall be there (to restrain them)
22|22|Each time they emerge to escape the distress, they will be thrown right back into it. (They will be told), "Taste the torment of fire
22|23|(On the other hand), Allah will surely usher into paradise _ through which run the rivers _ all those who believe and do the righteous acts. They will don gold bracelets and pearls, and their garments shall be made of silk
22|24|They were led towards the pious speech (in this life), and towards the path of the One most Worthy of praise
22|25|We have deemed the holy mosque (in Makkah) to be an open place. There, residents and the visitors are equal! We will reserve a painful punishment for those who disregard that (equality) and are unfair, and those unbelievers who obstruct others from the path of Allah and the holy mosque
22|26|(Remember) We settled Ibraheem here, where the Kaaba now stands (with instructions): let there be no partners ascribed to Me in My house, and let it be rendered pure for those who perform ´Tawwaf´, and (as part of their prayer) stand, kneel and prostrate
22|27|Call all the people for Hajj. Let them arrive on foot or mounted on lean camels. They will respond and arrive from all directions
22|28|Let them witness the benefits (that exist) here for them, and during the specified dates let them invoke the name of Allah upon the sacrificial animals He has granted. Then, let them eat the meat and also feed the poor and the needy
22|29|After that, let them attend to their personal needs, complete the rites (of ´Hajj´), fulfill their vows and go around the ancient house, the ´Kaaba´ _ (the rite of tawwaf)
22|30|That was the purpose of ´Kaaba´! According to your Lord, honoring the obligations imposed by Allah is really better for you. It is allowable for you to eat the flesh of the (sacrificial) animals, except those you were informed about earlier. So, shun the filth of idolatry and steer clear of the false statement
22|31|(Forsaking all else and) without ascribing partners to Him, be a true believer in Allah. Ascribing partners to Him is like falling from the sky and being snatched up by the birds along the way; or being carried off by a tornado to be dropped off in a remote place
22|32|That is the reality! The sanctity for the symbols of Allah surely comes from the piety within one´s heart
22|33|You may benefit (from the sacrificial animals) for a while but then their place of sacrifice is near the ancient house
22|34|Different people were given different rituals of slaughtering and invoking the name of Allah upon the animals He provides. But the fact is your God is only one God, so submit (only) to Him! Give the glad news to those who surrendered to Allah´s will with humility
22|35|Such are they that their hearts are filled with fear when reminded of Allah. They bear with fortitude every distress afflicting them, establish ´salat´ and spend in Our path out of what We have provided
22|36|We have assigned the camels to be the ceremonial sacrificial animals for you. That is a blessing for you. Invoke Allah´s name upon them at the time of sacrifice. Then when their carcasses come to rest, eat their meat and offer it to the needy _ those who ask for it, as well as those who are reticent. This is how much We have tamed them for your sake! Perhaps you will feel grateful
22|37|Neither their flesh nor their blood reaches Allah, but your piety reaches Him. Thus, We tamed them for you, so (at the time of sacrifice) you may glorify Allah Who gifted you these animals So give the good news to those who do good deeds
22|38|Of course, Allah guards those who believe. Surely, Allah does not like any faithless ungrateful being
22|39|Permission to fight back is granted to those being attacked. For they have been wronged! Allah is quite capable of helping them
22|40|They have been driven out of their homes for no other reason except that they say, "Allah is our Lord!" Allah causes the fall of different people _ each by another. Otherwise, many places of worship _ like the monasteries, the temples, the churches and the mosques where Allah´s name is chanted a lot _ would be demolished. Allah will most definitely help those who help His cause. Of course, Allah is the Strongest and the most Powerful
22|41|Those who _ if We give them power (and authority) in the land _ would establish the ´salat´, pay the ´zakat´, enjoin the good and forbid the evil! The final outcome in all matters rests with Allah´s decision
22|42|So if they refuse to believe you, remember that prior to them, the nations of ´Samood´, ´Aads´ and Nooh also disbelieved
22|43|As also the nation of Ibraheem and that of Loot
22|44|So did the people of Madian. Musa, too, was accused of lying. So I granted the unbelievers a chance to redeem and reform. Finally, I grabbed them. How severe was My vengeance
22|45|In this manner, We destroyed many towns because of their evil ways. They are (in total ruin) turned upside down on their roofs. (So are) their abandoned wells and their lofty castles
22|46|Have they not moved about in the land? They are endowed with hearts to reason, and the ears to hear. Indeed, their eyes are not sightless. Rather, what is blind are their hearts within their chests
22|47|They taunt you to bring on the punishment at once. Allah does not go back on His words. But as you count, a day for your Lord equals a thousand of your years
22|48|To many a sinning towns, I granted (a respite and) an opportunity to redeem themselves. Finally, I nabbed them. Towards Me is their destination
22|49|Say, "Oh you people! The fact is, I am a candid warner for you
22|50|Thus, there is forgiveness and a generous sustenance for those who believe and do righteous acts
22|51|While those who strive to undermine Our signs (verses) will be the companions of hell
22|52|It happened to every messenger and prophet We ever sent. Whenever they desired (and received a verse) Shaitan put his own spin (interpretation) upon it. But Allah removes whatever Shaitan casts. And then He confirms and strengthens His verses. Allah is All-knowing and All-wise
22|53|(He does this) so that He may turn the work of Shaitan into a lure for those whose hearts are diseased and hardened. Surely, because of their malice and rancor, the evil doers (in their dissent) have strayed too far away (from the truth)
22|54|(This happens) so that those with knowledge may recognize it to be the truth from your Lord, that they may believe it and that their hearts may acquire reverence for it. Allah certainly guides those who believe towards the straight path
22|55|The unbelievers would keep on wrangling until the hour of judgment comes upon them suddenly, or the punishment creeps up on them on a day of disaster
22|56|The sole authority that day shall belong to Allah! He will settle all disputes between them. (As a result) those who believe and do good deeds would be in a serene and blissful paradise
22|57|But there will be a disgraceful torment for the unbelievers _ those who reject Our verses
22|58|Allah will definitely grant the exquisite riches to those who emigrate for the sake of Allah, and in doing so are slain or happen to die. Indeed, it is Allah Who is the best of the providers
22|59|Very definitely, He will admit them into the entrances (of exquisite palaces) which will delight them. Allah, indeed is the All-knowing and the Forbearing
22|60|If anyone retaliates because he was wronged unjustly, and seeks damages proportionate to his suffering (then he is justified), and if he is wronged again, then (he will find that) Allah will definitely assist him. Allah is indeed Oft-pardoning and much Forgiving
22|61|Because it is Allah Who wraps the night over the day, and rolls up the day over the night. Surely, Allah is All-hearing and All-seeing
22|62|Because only Allah is the absolute truth, while all others they pray to besides Him are false. Indeed, Allah is the Loftiest, and the Greatest
22|63|Do you not observe? When Allah sends water down from the sky the land becomes green with plants. Indeed, Allah is Well-acquanted (with everything), and the most Kind
22|64|Everything in the heavens and on the earth belongs to Him. Indeed Allah is free from want and is the most Praise-worthy
22|65|Do you not see? Allah has tamed everything on this earth for you. The ships sail in the sea by His command, and He withholds the sky so high, so it will not collapse upon the earth except by His will. Indeed, Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Kind
22|66|It is He Who gave you life, and He will give you death! Then, He will bring you back to life. Man, surely, is very ungrateful
22|67|We prescribed different rites of worship for each people. Regarding that, they really should not dispute you. Invite (them) towards the ways of your Lord. Certainly, you are well guided, and on the straight path
22|68|But if they choose to argue, say, "Allah is well Aware of what you are doing
22|69|On the day of reckoning, Allah will sit in judgment and resolve every disagreement you used to have
22|70|Are you not aware that Allah knows everything in the heavens and on the earth? That it is (recorded) in a book? And that is certainly easy for Allah
22|71|Besides Allah, they worship others about whom they have no knowledge. He has not revealed an approval for that. There shall be no helpers for the evil doers
22|72|As Our clear lucid verses are recited, you can see denial writ large on the faces of the disbelievers. They seem ready to pounce upon those reading Our verses to them. Say, "Shall I tell you about a greater distress? The fire, which Allah promises for those who fail to believe, and which is a monstrous destination
22|73|Oh you people! An example is being quoted. Listen attentively! Those you pray to besides Allah can create nothing _ not even a fly, though they may pool all their resources. (Worse than that) they are too powerless to rescue anything that even a fly might wrest away from them. Feeble are the seekers, and feeble are those being sought
22|74|They failed to honor Allah as much as He merits to be honored. Indeed, Allah is the Mightiest, and the most Powerful
22|75|Allah selects His messengers from among the angels as well as men. Surely, Allah is All-hearing and All-seeing
22|76|He knows all that lies ahead of them and all that is behind them. And towards Allah are all matters directed (for decisions)
22|77|Oh you who believe! Worship your Lord by kneeling and falling prostrate before Him; and do good deeds, so that you may prosper
22|78|And struggle all out for Allah. For, this struggle merits an all out effort. He has chosen you and has placed no hardship in your religion, the creed of your father, Ibraheem. Not only in this (Qur´an), but in the past, too, He had named you Muslims. (He chose you) so the messengers may witness your deeds (and testify), and you may witness the deeds of the rest of the people (and testify). So establish the ´salat´ and pay the ´zakat´ and hold on to your link with Allah. He is your Master! What an excellent Master! And what an excellent Ally
23|1|The true believers are the ones really successful
23|2|Those who pray with humility
23|3|And shun vulgarity
23|4|And discharge their obligation of ´zakat´
23|5|Those who (guard their chastity and) rein in their sexual urges
23|6|Except with their wives and those their right hands possess. For that, they deserve no blame
23|7|But, whoever lusts after anything beyond that is a transgressor
23|8|(And those) who honor their pacts and the trusts (held by them)
23|9|And those who maintain their ´salat´ watchfully
23|10|Such (believers) will be the heirs
23|11|They shall inherit the paradise where they shall live for ever
23|12|Certainly, We have created man from strands of clay
23|13|Then We made him into a drop (of sperm) lodged in an environment of stability
23|14|Next, We turned that drop of semen into a clot of blood and then changed that clot into a chunk of flesh. Next, We hardened that chunk of flesh into bones, and clothed the bones with flesh. Finally, We converted it into an altogether different being. Therefore, glorify Allah, the Best of the creators
23|15|Eventually, you would certainly die
23|16|And then, you will certainly be resurrected on the Day of Judgment
23|17|And surely, We have created seven systems (of heavens) over you. We are definitely not unmindful of the creation
23|18|We sent down water from the sky in measured amounts, and stored it in the land. We certainly have the ability to make it run dry
23|19|With it, We grow orchards of dates and grapes. You get plenty of fruits from the orchard as your livelihood
23|20|(We also produce) the oil tree that grows on Mount Sinai. It yields oil and makes a delicious meal
23|21|Indeed, there are lessons for you in your cattle, too. From their bodies We fetch you a drink (milk). You gain many benefits from them. You eat them, too
23|22|You mount them, and go aboard ships (over land and sea)
23|23|We surely sent Nooh towards his nation and he said, "Oh my people! Worship Allah! You have no god besides Him. Why do you not fear Him
23|24|But the elders, the leaders of his disbelieving nation said, "He is just a human like you, and he seeks dominance over you. Had Allah wanted, He would have sent angels. Never have we heard this from our forefathers
23|25|He is merely a man possessed. So just watch him for a while
23|26|He said, "Lord, help me against them. They have accused me of lying
23|27|Thus, We inspired him, "Build an ark under My supervision and instructions. When the floodwater comes bubbling out of the oven, bring on board a pair of each animal _ male and female, and also your family. But not those about whom Our word has already gone forth. Do not talk to Me about the evil doers! They shall all drown
23|28|When you and those with you have embarked, say, "All praise is for Allah Who saved us from the evil nation
23|29|Say, "Oh Lord, bring us ashore to a blessed land. You are the Best among those who lead ashore
23|30|In it, surely, is a sign. We are the One Who puts you through tests
23|31|After them, We raised another nation
23|32|We raised, from amongst their own, a messenger who said, "Worship Allah! You have no god besides Him! Why do you not fear Him
23|33|The elders and the leaders of his disbelieving nation who denied the (scheduled) meeting of the afterlife _ and whom We had granted luxuries in this life _ said, "He is only a man like you. He eats and drinks the same as you do
23|34|And, you will of course be the losers if you follow a man like yourself
23|35|Does he assert that after you die and become dust and bones you will rise (and live) again
23|36|What you are being promised is quite far fetched! Quite remote
23|37|Nothing but our existence in this world is real. Here is where we live and die; and we are not going to be resurrected
23|38|This man has merely invented a lie about Allah! We do not believe him
23|39|(The messenger) said, "Lord, help me! They have called me a liar
23|40|(Allah) said, "In a short while, they shall cut a sorry figure
23|41|Quite appropriately, a mighty blast seized them, and We churned them into trash. Thus, the nation of evildoers was dumped away
23|42|Then, after them We raised other nations
23|43|No nation can expedite its allotted time, nor prolong it
23|44|Then, We sent many messengers in succession. Every nation rejected their messenger when he came to them. So, We let them follow one after the other along the path of destruction. We reduced them to fables and folk tales. Any nation that refused to believe was tossed aside
23|45|Then, We sent Musa and his brother Haroon with Our signs, the clear and unmistakable proofs
23|46|To the pharaoh and his chiefs! But they displayed arrogance. They were a pretentious nation
23|47|They said, "Shall We believe these two men _ humans like us? Their people are our slaves
23|48|So they refused to believe (the messengers) and were destroyed
23|49|We certainly gave Musa the book, so that they may find their way
23|50|We deemed Jesus and his mother to be a test. We sheltered them on a plateau _ a peaceful place with a flowing stream
23|51|Oh messengers! Eat the wholesome food and perform the righteous acts. Indeed, I am well Aware of what you do
23|52|Surely, this nation of yours is a single nation and I am your Lord. So fear Me
23|53|But they divided up their religion into sects _ each one well pleased with its own beliefs
23|54|So, let them stay engrossed in their pastime for a while longer
23|55|What do they think? That when We increase their wealth and family
23|56|Are We rushing to bestow favors upon them? Of course not! They just don´t realize
23|57|Indeed, those who fear their Lord with anxiety and awe
23|58|And acknowledge the signs of their Lord
23|59|And do not associate partners with Him
23|60|And those who give charity _ whatever they can; their hearts tremble at the thought of returning to their Lord
23|61|They are the ones rushing towards all deeds of excellence, and they are the ones who surpass (excellence)
23|62|We do not burden anyone over and above his ability to bear. We have the book that declares everything truthfully. They shall not be wronged
23|63|But their hearts reeked of indifference (for the truth) and their deeds were different (from those of the believers). They carried on with their deeds
23|64|Until We grabbed their well-to-do (those living in luxury) with punishment. Then suddenly, they began to plead and entreat earnestly
23|65|Today, do not beg! Indeed, you shall receive no help from Me
23|66|My verses used to be read to you, but you used to turn your backs on them in disdain
23|67|You were arrogant! And during your night time escapades, you used to talk ill (of Our verses)
23|68|Did they not ponder upon the words (of Allah) at all? Did the messenger bring any thing that hadn´t ever come to their forefathers
23|69|Or is it that they do not know the messenger and therefore they reject
23|70|Or do they think he is mentally ill? Of course not! He has brought to them the absolute truth, but most of them have an aversion to the truth
23|71|Had the truth been made to follow their whims, the heavens and the earth and everything thereon would be ravaged and ruined. No, We have really brought them a reminder about their own selves. But, they are turning away from the narration about themselves
23|72|Or do you charge them a fee? The reward of your Lord is far better! He is the Best of the providers
23|73|Certainly! You are definitely calling them towards the straight path
23|74|And of course those who do not believe in the afterlife desire to drift away from that path
23|75|We may have mercy upon them and remove the distress afflicting them, but obstinately they continue to rove about in defiance
23|76|Indeed, We did grab them with distress, but they failed to surrender and adopt humility
23|77|Until We let loose upon them the severe torment! Then suddenly, they will lose all hope and wail in despair
23|78|It is He Who granted you the hearing, the sight and the heart (to feel and understand)! But seldom do you offer thanks
23|79|It is He Who scattered you on the earth; and you will be gathered together in His presence (again)
23|80|It is He Who gives life and death, and the changing of the night and the day is his (handiwork). Do you then, not understand
23|81|But in fact, their remarks are identical to those of their forerunners _ (the unbelievers of earlier times)
23|82|(They say) "Really? Will we really come back to life after we die and have become dust and bones
23|83|Of course in the past, too, the exact same promise was made to our parents and us. These are nothing but tales of people gone by
23|84|Say, "(Answer me this) if you know at all! To whom belongs this earth and everyone on it
23|85|They will respond, "Allah!" Say, "Then, do you not bear that in mind
23|86|Ask them, "Who is the Lord of the seven heavens, and who is the Lord of the Mighty Throne
23|87|They will say, "Allah!" Say, "Then, do you not fear Him
23|88|Say, "(Answer this), if you know at all! In whose hands is the destiny of all things? Who offers protection? And from whom there exists no escape
23|89|They will reply, "Allah!" Say, "Why then, are you being deceived
23|90|We did disclose the truth to them! But of course, they are the liars
23|91|Allah did not adopt a son. Nor is there another god along with Him. Else, each god would draw his creation apart and withdraw. Each would attempt to overwhelm the other. Exalted is Allah, far above what they say about Him
23|92|He knows the unseen and the manifest. And He is a lot loftier than those they associate with Him (as partners)
23|93|Say, "My Lord, in case You let me be the witness to the torment they have been promised
23|94|My Lord, do not let me be a part of the evil nation
23|95|We are indeed perfectly capable of letting you witness the punishment with which We have threatened them
23|96|(Oh messenger), rid the evil with that which is better! We are very well aware of what they utter
23|97|And say, "My Lord, I seek refuge with You against the evil promptings of the Shaitans
23|98|And I seek refuge with You, my Lord, so that they may not even come close (to me)
23|99|And when death comes to anyone of them, he will say, "My Lord, send me back
23|100|To the place I left behind! Perhaps, I will do good deeds (this time around)." Definitely not! These are mere words he utters. A barrier behind the dead (preventing their return to this life) shall exist till the day of their resurrection
23|101|Then, all links of kinship between them shall cease on that day. The day the trumpet sounds, they will not inquire about one another
23|102|Those whose scales (of good deeds) weigh heavier shall be successful
23|103|While the ones whose scales (of good deeds) weigh lighter have incurred for themselves a severe loss. In hell, they shall stay forever
23|104|Fire will scorch their faces. There, they will be gloomy and grave
23|105|Isn´t it true that My verses were recited to you, but you used to reject them
23|106|They will say, "Our Lord, our woes got the better of us. We are indeed, a blundering people
23|107|Our Lord! Take us out of here, if we ever commit (the same) again, we would really be evil
23|108|Allah will say, "Enough of that! Stay in it, and do not talk to Me anymore
23|109|Indeed, a group of Our servants used to pray, "Our Lord, We believe! Forgive us and have mercy upon us. You are the very Best of those who shower mercy
23|110|But you made them targets of ridicule. You mocked and scoffed at them with such intensity that it even made you forget Me (and My message)
23|111|Today I have rewarded them for their patience and perseverance! Indeed, they are the successful ones
23|112|Allah will ask, "How many years did you stay on earth
23|113|They shall reply, "We stayed only a day or part of a day. Ask those who are (given the task of) maintaining accounts
23|114|Allah will say, "You stayed for just a short while! If you had only realized
23|115|Did you think that We created you in vain? And that you will never be brought back to Us (for reckoning)
23|116|Exalted is Allah, the real Emperor! There is no god but He, the Lord of the Supreme Throne
23|117|Anyone who calls any other god besides Allah _ and for such an act he has no explanation _ will have to reckon with Allah. Surely, such unbelievers never succeed
23|118|And say, "My Lord, grant forgiveness and have mercy! Indeed, You are the very Best of those who shower mercy
24|1|It is We Who revealed this Surah, and it is We Who deemed it mandatory for you. In it, We have revealed clear unambiguous verses! Perhaps you will take counsel
24|2|Let both _ the man and the woman _ guilty of illicit sexual intercourse be punished with a hundred lashes each. If you really believe in Allah and the Day of Judgment, you will not let compassion hold you back from (implementing) the laws of Allah. A party of believers should be around to witness the punishment
24|3|The adulterer may marry none except an adulteress or a pagan, and the adulteress may be wedded only to an adulterer or a polytheist. It is prohibited for the believers (to marry an adulteress or let an adulterer marry the believing woman)
24|4|Flog those who accuse any of the chaste women (of committing adultery), but fail to backup (their charges) with four eyewitnesses. Flog them with eighty lashes, and thereafter do not accept their testimony ever again. Surely, they are the wicked ones
24|5|Except those who repent after that, and reform themselves. Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
24|6|And, if someone accuses his wife (of adultery) and has no witnesses other than himself, then let his testimony be treated as that of four witnesses. (Let him testify four times, saying each time that) he swears by Allah that he speaks the truth
24|7|And the fifth time, (let him say) that the curse of Allah be upon him if he was lying
24|8|And the wife´s punishment would be called off, if she testifies four times, (saying) that she swears by Allah, that he (her husband) is lying
24|9|And the fifth time (let her say) that the wrath of Allah may befall her if her husband is telling the truth
24|10|(You would have erred) had it not been for the favors of Allah and His mercy upon you; and also the fact that Allah is the most Forgiving and the Wisest
24|11|Those who brought up a slanderous lie (against the messenger´s wife) are but a small faction amongst you. Do not consider it bad for yourself. Rather, it is beneficial for you! Each of them is liable for the sin to the extent of his involvement. But the greatest torment is for the one among them who assumed the major responsibility
24|12|Why didn´t the believers _ men and women _ assume virtue for one of their own _ (a believer)? When you heard such a thing, why did you not say, "This is quite obviously a lie
24|13|Why did they not bring four witnesses (to back the allegations)? Since they failed to come up with the witnesses they, in the sight of Allah, are the liars
24|14|Allah has bestowed upon you His favors and His mercy, in this world and the life-to-come. Else, a great torture would have inflicted you because of the unrestrained gossip you indulged in
24|15|With your tongues, you spread (the lie), and with your lips you uttered that about which you had no knowledge. You considered the matter trivial, but according to Allah, it was very grave
24|16|When you heard it, why did you not say, "It is not proper for us to discuss such a thing! Exalted are You (Oh Allah), it is a treacherous slander
24|17|Allah cautions you against behaving like that ever again _ if you are really the believers
24|18|And Allah explains to you His verses clearly. Allah is the all-Knowing and the all-Hearing
24|19|A painful punishment _ in this world and in the afterlife _ awaits those who want sexual waywardness and obscenity to spread through the believers. Allah knows it (all) while you know nothing (at all)
24|20|(And it would have spread) had it not been for the mercy of Allah and His favors upon you. Allah is the most Gracious and the most Merciful
24|21|Oh you who believe! Do not emulate the example of Shaitan. Whoever follows the footsteps of Shaitan (should know) that he always exhorts the commission of obscene and vile deeds and the prohibited acts. The favors of Allah and His mercy are upon you. Otherwise, none of you could have ever acquired the purity of heart. But Allah purifies whomever He wants. Allah is all-Hearing and all-Knowing
24|22|The wealthy and the resourceful should not swear that they would withhold assistance from their needy relatives and the poor, nor from those who have left their homes for the sake of Allah! Rather, they should forgive and bear no malice. Wouldn´t you like Allah to forgive you? Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
24|23|Surely, cursed _ in this world and in the afterlife _ are those who level charges of immorality against the innocent and chaste believing women. There is a severe punishment for them
24|24|That day, their tongues, their hands and their feet would testify against them regarding what they used to do
24|25|That day, Allah will grant them to the full extent their rightful compensation; and they will know that Allah is the self-evident truth
24|26|Bad women are for bad men who deserve the bad women. Similarly, pious women are for pious men, who deserve the pious women. They are upright and absolved of what others babble about them. Theirs are the forgiveness, and a generous provision
24|27|Oh you believers, do not enter the homes other than your own; unless you seek permission from their occupants, and have saluted them. This is better for you. Perhaps, you will comply
24|28|Do not enter if you find no one at home, except when you have the (prior) permission to do so. Return if you are asked to go back. That is more appropriate for you. Allah is very well aware of what you do
24|29|It is not wrong for you to enter an unoccupied house in which you have your goods (wares and other interests). Allah knows what you declare and what you conceal
24|30|And ask the believing men to (be modest and) lower their gaze and maintain their chastity. That is righteous and better. Allah is quite familiar with what they do
24|31|Ask the believing women to lower their gaze, guard their chastity, and not leave bare their beauty and charm, except that which becomes apparent by itself. Ask them to pull their veil-cloths down across their bosom, and not show their adornments to anyone except their husbands, fathers, husband´s father, sons, husband´s sons, brothers and their sons, sister´s sons, their women, the female slaves they own, the men-servants too old to have erotic desires, and boys not yet old enough to have awareness of the carnal. Ask them not to stamp their feet hard, in order to display (and jingle the jewelry worn on their feet and other) hidden adornments (under their outer garments). Oh you believers! Turn _ all of you _ towards Allah in repentance. Perhaps you will prosper
24|32|And arrange for the single (but poor men and women) amongst you to marry the pious slaves and maidservants. If they are poor Allah may enrich them by His grace. Allah abounds in generosity and knowledge
24|33|Those lacking the means to marry should abstain until Allah enriches them by His grace. Write down for your slaves _ those who desire to work for their freedom _ (the terms of emancipation) if you know them to be worthy and able. Give them something from the wealth Allah has granted you. Do not _ to gain the worldly benefits _ compel your slave girls into prostitution, while they wish to remain chaste. For the slave girl compelled in this manner, Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Kind
24|34|We have revealed to you the clear unambiguous verses and the example of those gone by earlier, and (We have revealed) the right advice for the pious
24|35|Allah is the light of the heavens and the earth. An example of its brilliance: there is a lamp in a luminous niche. The lamp is in a glass which itself gleams like a radiant star. It is lit by the oil of the blessed tree _ neither from the West nor the East. The oil of the lamp is ready to glow by itself even without being kindled. The bright luminous light is atop another brilliant light. Allah guides towards this light whomever He wants and Allah quotes this parable for the people. Allah is knowledgeable of all things
24|36|Allah has favored the setting up of houses, where _ every morning and evening _ His name would be glorified and His praises chanted
24|37|Neither trade nor sale distracts (God-fearing) men from remembering Allah, establishing ´salat´ or paying ´zakat´. They are frightened of that day when the hearts will flip and the eyes will turn (white with horror)
24|38|So, Allah may grant them compensation consistent with the best of their deeds, and boost it further by His grace. Allah grants unlimited bounties to whomever He wants
24|39|The deeds of the unbelievers are like a mirage in a sandy desert. The thirsty believes he sees water, but finds nothing there when he comes closer. There, he does find Allah, Who will let him have his due. Allah is very swift in reckoning
24|40|(The condition of the unbelievers is) like darkness in the deep dark sea covered over by a huge wave, which is swarmed over by another tide. Up above are thick heavy clouds. (Total) darkness, one atop another! If one pulls out one´s hand, one could hardly see it. The one whom Allah deprives of light cannot obtain light elsewhere
24|41|Do you not observe? Everyone in the heavens and on the earth chants the praises of Allah. The birds fly in the sky with wings spread. Each being has learnt its own prescribed form of ´salat´, and its style of singing the praises of Allah! Allah is well aware of what they do
24|42|The domain of the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah, and to Allah is the return journey (of all humans)
24|43|Do you not observe? Allah shoves the clouds gently, and brings several of them together into a pile. Then you see raindrops falling down from it. From the mountains, He raises the hailstorm into the sky and rains it down. With it, He strikes those He wants, while He spares others. The lightning flashes (of the storm) almost blind the vision
24|44|Allah alternates the night and the day. Surely, there is a lesson in this for those with insight
24|45|Allah has created all creatures from water. Some creep on their bellies, some walk on two legs and some on all four. Allah creates what He wants! Indeed, Allah has power over everything
24|46|We have surely revealed the plain precise verses! Allah guides towards the straight path whom He wants
24|47|They (unbelievers) say, "We believe in Allah and His Messenger and we obey." But after that, some of them turn away. Those are not the believers
24|48|When they are called towards Allah and His messenger _ so he may settle their differences _ some of them reject and turn away
24|49|(However) if the truth is in their favor, they feign obedience and accept (the decision)
24|50|Is there a disease in their hearts? Or do they mistrust? Do they suspect that Allah and His messenger would treat them unfairly? Of course not! In fact, it is they who are unjust
24|51|The believers, too, are called towards Allah and His messenger, so He may settle their differences. Their outlook (in sharp contrast) is that they say, "We hear and we obey". Such, indeed, are the successful ones
24|52|Those who obey Allah and His messenger, fear Allah and do their duty, are indeed the triumphant ones
24|53|They swear so very solemnly that they would definitely leave home (and go forth into battle) if you ordered them. Say, "Do not swear! Obedience is what is required!" Allah is well Aware of what you do
24|54|Say, "Obey Allah and obey the messenger and if you turn away, then (remember that) the messenger is liable for the responsibility he bears, while you are accountable for your burden of responsibility. If you obey him, you would be led on to the right way. Apart from conveying the message clearly, the messenger has no further responsibility
24|55|Allah grants a guarantee to those of you who believe and perform the righteous deeds. He will most certainly appoint them the successors on earth, just like He appointed the people prior to you as successors. He will consolidate their way of life, much to their satisfaction. He will change their present state of insecurity and fear, into one of safety and peace. They would worship Me and would not associate anyone as My partner. Whoever disbelieves after this, is certainly wicked
24|56|Establish the ´salat´, pay the ´zakat´ and obey the messenger. So that you may be dealt with mercifully
24|57|Do not even doubt that the unbelievers can ever render (Allah) helpless on this earth. Fire will be their abode, which is indeed the worst of the destination
24|58|Oh you believers, let your slaves and young pre-puberty children seek permission (to come to you) during the following three times: before the morning prayer, at around noon when you undress (for a nap), and after the night prayers. These three timings are private! At other times, there is no harm either for them or you (to come unannounced). After all, you have to move about and see each other. Thus, Allah clarifies the verses for you. Allah is all-Knowing, all-Wise
24|59|Once your children attain puberty, let them seek permission (to enter your private chambers) just like other adults do. In this manner, Allah clarifies for you His verses. Allah is all-Knowing, all-Wise
24|60|It would not do any harm if the old ladies discard their veil cloth _ those who are past their childbearing age and do not expect to get married. But not in such a way that they display their charm! However, it is better for them to refrain (from discarding their veil-cloths). Allah hears all and knows all
24|61|There is no restriction upon the blind, the lame or the sick to eat (at anybody´s home); just as you are at liberty (either) to eat at your own home or the homes of your father, mother, brothers, sisters, maternal uncles and aunts and the paternal uncles and aunts. You may also eat at the homes in your possession or those belonging to your friends. There is no prohibition: you may eat alone or together. But when you enter the home, salute the people there with the noble and blessed greeting from Allah. In this manner, Allah clarifies the verses for you. Perhaps you would understand
24|62|The real believers are those who have faith in Allah and His messenger. On a collective mission with the messenger, they do not depart without asking leave. Those who seek permission before leaving are actually the ones believing in Allah and His messenger. (Oh messenger), if they ask your leave to go, in order to attend to any of their concerns, you may allow whomever you want and ask Allah to forgive them. Indeed, Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
24|63|Do not think that the call of the messenger is quite the same as an invitation from others amongst you. Allah is well Aware of those who _ using others as a cover _ slip away. Those who violate the commands of the messenger should beware lest a trial may inflict them, or a painful torment may come upon them
24|64|Listen good! Everything in the heavens and on earth belongs to Allah! He knows whatever course you are on. The day they are brought back to Him is when He will show them (the outcome of) their deeds. Allah is Knowledgeable about everything
25|1|Blessed is He Who revealed the criterion _ (the Qur´an) _ to His servant (Muhammad, SAW), so he may serve as a warner for the whole world
25|2|The domain of the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah. He did not beget a son, nor does He have a partner in His domain. He created everything, and then ordained its destiny in a precise manner
25|3|The other gods they accept besides Allah create nothing, and are themselves created. It is not within their means to harm anyone, or confer any benefits _ not even upon themselves. They have no ability to give death or life, or to resurrect the dead
25|4|The unbelievers say, "It is nothing but a lie that he has invented, and other folks have helped him with it." They have really brought about an unjust and false testimony
25|5|They say, "Tales of people long gone! He has written them down. (These tales) are dictated to him morning and evening
25|6|Say, "This Quran is revealed to me by the One Who knows all the mysteries of the heavens and the earth. Indeed, He is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
25|7|They say, "What sort of messenger is this? He eats food and moves about in the bazaars. Why wasn´t an angel sent down with him to be a co-warner
25|8|Else, why was he not presented with a treasure? Why is it that he has no orchard to enrich him?" These unjust people remark, "You are merely following a crazy man
25|9|See! How they throw insults at you, and thus lead themselves astray! They are not able to find their way
25|10|Blessed is the One Who, if He wants, can grant you a much better garden than that, like the gardens with streams running right through. He can build you palaces
25|11|No! In fact, they refused to believe the hour (of judgment). For the one who rejects the hour, We have prepared a blazing fire
25|12|As the fire catches sight of them from afar, they will hear its sighs and sounds of fury
25|13|Bound together in chains, they will wail and beg for death as they are tossed into a cramped space (in the hellfire)
25|14|This day, do not just ask for a single death! Call for several deaths
25|15|Ask them, "Is this better? Or the eternal paradise which the pious have been promised?" It is their reward and their final destination
25|16|There, anything they desire shall be theirs; and there, they shall live forever. That promise is a definite obligation upon your Lord
25|17|That is the day He will gather them all; and also those they worship other than Allah. To them He will say, "Was it really you who made these servants of Mine go astray? Or did they stray from the path all on their own
25|18|They will say, "Glory be to You! It is not right for us to accept any patrons other than You! You had them and their parents enjoy plenty of comforts. But, they disregarded the warnings and became a doomed people
25|19|They (the false gods) will deny flat out then, what you are claiming (for them) now. Then, you would be unable to avert disaster or seek help. We will make the evildoers amongst you taste the tremendous torment
25|20|(Oh messenger)! Prior to you, too, every messenger We ever sent consumed food and moved about in the bazaars. We designed each of you to be a test for others. So, won´t you be patient? Your Lord is ever alert and watchful
25|21|Those not anticipating a meeting with Us said, "Why were angels not sent down for us? And why do we not see our God?" They deem themselves too important, and have been arrogant a great deal
25|22|One day, they will get to see the angels. But (the proceedings of) that day will not bring any good news for these criminals. The angels will say, "For you the good news is absolutely forbidden
25|23|We will bring out all the good deeds they have performed. Then, We will grind them into fine dust and blow the dust away
25|24|That day, the people of paradise shall have exquisite residences and the most peaceful resting places
25|25|That day, the sky and the clouds will split apart; and through it, angels shall descend in a continuous stream
25|26|That day, the sole and genuine authority shall belong to Rehman. That day will be tough for the unbelievers
25|27|That day, the evildoers will bite their hands in despair and say, "Oh misery! If only I had gone along with the messenger
25|28|Alas! My misfortune! If only I had not taken that one _ (the Shaitan) _ as a friend
25|29|He really made me disregard the advice when it came to me." Indeed, the Shaitan always betrays man in times of need
25|30|And the messenger will say, "My Lord, truly my people had forsaken this Qur´an
25|31|In this manner, We designated for every prophet an opponent from amongst the guilty. Your Lord suffices as a Guide and a Helper
25|32|The unbelievers say, "Why wasn´t this Qur´an revealed to him in a single stretch?" This was done in order that We may fortify your heart with it. It is revealed gradually and phrased elegantly
25|33|We responded to every objection they threw at you. We brought you the truth and the most excellent explanations
25|34|Gathered around the hellfire and shoved into it face down, would indeed be those who held the worst of beliefs and had strayed the farthest away from the path
25|35|We had surely granted Musa the book, and had appointed his brother Haroon as an assistant
25|36|We said, "Go to the people who have rejected Our signs." (Finally) We annihilated that nation completely
25|37|We drowned the nation of Nooh when they rejected the messengers! We turned them into an admonition for the whole world. For the evil doers, We have prepared a painful punishment
25|38|(Also for) the Aads, the Samoods, the people of ´Russ´ and several generations in between
25|39|We gave all of them the words of wisdom. Finally, We brought them to total ruin
25|40|They have surely passed by the town upon which was sent the most wretched rain. Did they not see it (coming)? But they did not expect the life after death
25|41|As soon as they see you, they make fun of you (saying), "Is he the one Allah sent as a messenger
25|42|He had almost wooed us away from our gods. But we stayed staunch upon them." As soon as they confront their punishment they will find out who had strayed farther away from the path
25|43|Did you see the one who took his own wishes and whims as his god? Can you then, (accept to) be in charge of his affairs
25|44|Do you think most of them listen, or ponder? They are like animals! Nothing more! In fact, they are (worse; they are) more astray from the right path
25|45|Do you not see how your Lord spreads out darkness? If He wanted, He could make it permanent! But He appointed the sun as a pilot (to drive away the darkness)
25|46|Thus We gently seize (the darkness) and gradually ease it away
25|47|It is He Who made the night don the decor that is fit for sleeping; and He made the sleep invigorating for you. He made the day a time to wake up
25|48|It is He Who sends the winds as heralds of His mercy! We send pristine water down from the sky
25|49|So that, with it We may bring the dead land back to life and quench (the thirst of) a great many cattle and people We have created
25|50|And We repeat this (feat) in their midst in various ways (and often enough) in order to impress upon them (the truth). But most people (being ungrateful) insist upon disbelieving
25|51|If We wanted, We could have raised a warner in every single locality
25|52|So, do not yield to (the demands of) the unbelievers, and strive against them relentlessly for the sake of this great struggle
25|53|It is He Who joined (the two) seas together. One is sweet and palatable, the other brackish and bitter. He has placed between the two of them a barrier _ an absolute restraint
25|54|It is He Who created man from water, then initiated two kinds of lineage of descent for him _ the paternal and maternal. Your Lord is Omnipotent
25|55|Besides Allah, they worship those who do not confer benefits upon them, nor cause them harm. The unbeliever always aids (Shaitan) against his Lord
25|56|We have sent you as a bearer of good news; and as a warner
25|57|Say, "In return, I do not ask you for a reward, except that whoever wants may adopt the path towards his Lord
25|58|Place your trust in the Ever-Living _ the One Who will never die, and chant His praises. He is sufficiently knowledgeable about the sins of His servants
25|59|It is He Who created the heavens and the earth and everything in between in six periods of time, and then mounted the throne. (He is) Rehman! Ask Him! He knows it all
25|60|When they are asked to fall prostrate before Rehman they say, "Who is Rehman? Shall we fall prostrate merely because you tell us to do so?" Thus, their hatred grows
25|61|Blessed is He Who created fortified spheres in the heavens and placed (in one of them) the great lamp _ (the sun) _ and the luminous moon
25|62|It is He Who makes the night and the day follow each other! A lesson for the one who wants to reflect, and wants to be grateful
25|63|The (real) servants of Rehman are those who carry themselves around in this world with humility and serenity. When accosted by ignorant ones they respond, "Peace
25|64|Those who spend nights (in prayers) standing and prostrating before their Lord
25|65|Those who say, "Oh our Lord, keep the torment of the hellfire away from us. Indeed, that torment is abiding and unyielding
25|66|Indeed, it is the worst place as an abode
25|67|They are neither extravagant nor miserly. While spending, they remain steady between the two extremes
25|68|They who do not pray to gods other than Allah, do not kill a being prohibited by Allah, unless mandated by justice, and do not commit adultery. Anyone indulging in these acts will receive punishment
25|69|His punishment will be doubled on the Day of Judgment, and he will stay there forever in a disgraceful despicable state
25|70|Except those who repent, believe and perform righteous acts. For such ones Allah will exchange their bad deeds with good ones. And Allah is the most Forgiving, the most Merciful
25|71|He who renounces (his evil ways) and performs the righteous deeds has indeed turned to Allah with true repentance
25|72|(The righteous are) those who do not bear false testimony. When they come across anything banal and indecent, they pass by it with dignity and grace
25|73|When reminded of the verses of their Lord, they do not stay inactive (and mute) like the deaf and the blind. (They listen and ponder)
25|74|Those who say, "Our Lord, grant us joy and bliss with our wives and children, and make us the models for the righteous (among our progeny to follow)
25|75|Those are the ones who will be rewarded with the exalted places (in paradise) in return for their patient persistence. They shall be greeted with the salutations of peace
25|76|They will stay there for ever! An excellent place to stay! An excellent abode
25|77|Say (to the unbelievers), "Unless you call my Lord and pray to Him, He would care nothing about you at all. But now, since you have rejected Him the torment will be yours forever
26|1|Ta, Seen, Meem
26|2|These are the verses of the vividly clear book
26|3|Would you then be overcome with sorrow because they do not believe
26|4|We can, if We want, reveal to them a sign from the heavens, which would cause their heads to bow down (in submission)
26|5|They turn their backs on every fresh reminder that ever comes to them from Rehman
26|6|They have now already rejected it (the Qur´an) and have made fun of it. But very soon the reality (and the effect) of their mockery will dawn upon them
26|7|Do they not look at the earth? We have caused all kinds of beneficial plants to grow on the land
26|8|In this, there is indeed a sign! Yet, most of them are not going to believe
26|9|And your Lord, indeed, is the most Powerful and the most Kind
26|10|(Tell them about the time) when your Lord summoned Musa, "Go to the evil-doing nation
26|11|The nation of the pharaoh! Do they not fear
26|12|Musa said, "My Lord, I am really afraid that they will reject me
26|13|My chest feels tight and my tongue fails to express. So, send for (my brother) Haroon
26|14|They have a charge (of a crime) against me. I fear that they will put me to death
26|15|(Allah) said, "Of course not! Go to them _ both of you _ with Our signs. Of course, We are with you listening (to everything)
26|16|So go to the pharaoh and say, "We are the messengers of the Lord of the entire universe
26|17|Therefore, send the children of Israel with us
26|18|The pharaoh said, "Did we not raise you up from an infant? And did you not spend a portion of your life with us
26|19|Yet, you committed that crime! That which you did! You are ungrateful
26|20|(Musa) said, "I did it then, when I was misguided
26|21|So I felt frightened and ran away from you. But my Lord gave me the commandments and appointed me a messenger
26|22|This favor you boast of conferring upon me is (nothing but the fact) that you have enslaved the children of Israel
26|23|The pharaoh asked, "And what is this Lord of the universe
26|24|Musa said, "The Lord of the heavens and the earth, and everything that lies between the two, if you want to be specific
26|25|The pharaoh said to those around him, "Did you hear that
26|26|(Musa) added, "Your Lord, and the Lord of your parents and ancestors
26|27|(The pharaoh) said, "This messenger of yours sent towards you is surely a lunatic
26|28|(Musa) continued, "The Lord of the East and the West and whatever lies between the two, if you were to understand
26|29|(The pharaoh) said, "I will have you rot in prison if you accept any god other than me
26|30|(Musa) said, "Even if I offered something definite (as evidence)
26|31|The pharaoh said, "Present it now, if you really mean it
26|32|(Musa) threw down the stick in his hand. Then, suddenly (and distinctly) it became a serpent
26|33|(He pulled his hand out of his armpit) and it suddenly appeared dazzling white to the viewers
26|34|The pharaoh addressed his courtiers saying, "He is surely a skilled magician
26|35|By the force of his magic, he wants to expel you from this land. Now, what do you recommend
26|36|They said, "Let him and his brother go back. Then, send your agents to the cities
26|37|They will summon every expert magician before you
26|38|At the specified time on the appointed day, the magicians were summoned
26|39|And the people were told, "Would you, too, come to the assembly
26|40|So that if the magicians triumph, we will follow them
26|41|The magicians came to the pharaoh and said, "There would surely be a reward in it for us, if we are victorious. Wouldn´t there
26|42|(The pharaoh) said, "Yes! In that case, you will become my close associates
26|43|Musa said to them, "Cast (your spell) whatever you have to
26|44|They cast their (spells on the) ropes and sticks and said, "By the power of the pharaoh, we will certainly triumph
26|45|Musa, too, threw his stick and it gobbled up all the illusions they had conjured up
26|46|The magicians fell down prostrate
26|47|They said, "We accept the Lord of the universe
26|48|The Lord of Musa and Haroon
26|49|The pharaoh said, "You dare to believe him before I could give you my consent. He must be your chief who has taught you the art of magic. You will soon come to know. Be sure, I will lop off your hand from one side and the leg from the other. After that, I will definitely crucify you (all)
26|50|They said, "It does not matter! We will surely return to our Lord
26|51|(They prayed), "We truly hope that our Lord will forgive our sins, (since) we are the first ones to believe
26|52|We sent revelation to Musa, "Slip away with My servants at night. You are surely going to be pursued
26|53|The pharaoh sent his agents to the cities to proclaim
26|54|They are just a handful of people
26|55|They have wrought our wrath (upon themselves)
26|56|And we are all here _ watchful and forewarned
26|57|(In this manner) We brought them out of their gardens, and spas
26|58|Their treasures and their fine residences
26|59|And We had the children of Israel inherit such things
26|60|They went after Musa and his followers at the crack of dawn
26|61|When the two opposing groups saw each other, the followers of Musa said, "We have been caught
26|62|(Musa) said, "Of course not! My Lord is with me! He will guide me, for sure
26|63|We instructed Musa by revelation, to strike the sea with his stick! The sea split; each portion stood like a huge towering mountain
26|64|We brought the other group closer
26|65|We rescued Musa and all those with him
26|66|And We drowned the others
26|67|Surely, there is a sign in that. Yet, most of them do not believe
26|68|It is your Lord Who is the most Powerful and the most Merciful
26|69|Narrate to them the story of Ibraheem
26|70|As he asked his father and his people, "Whom do you worship
26|71|They said, "We worship idols. And our devotion to them is constant
26|72|(Ibraheem) said, "Do they hear you when you call them
26|73|And do they help you, or hurt you
26|74|They said, "No! But we found our forefathers doing the same thing
26|75|(Ibraheem) said, "Did you ever notice (prudently) what it is that you worship
26|76|You and your parents of bygone days
26|77|Indeed, they are my enemies _ all of them; other than the Lord of the worlds
26|78|The One Who created me; and He guides
26|79|The One Who feeds me and quenches my thirst
26|80|When I fall sick, He restores my health
26|81|The One Who will give me death and will resurrect me after that
26|82|The One Who, I hope, will forgive my sins on the Day of Judgment
26|83|My Lord! Give me the wisdom and enroll me among the righteous
26|84|Grant me an honorable reputation with the future generations
26|85|And have me inherit the paradise full of favors
26|86|Forgive my father. He has surely gone astray
26|87|Do not disgrace me on the day they shall all be resurrected
26|88|The day when wealth and offspring will confer no benefits
26|89|Except to the one who comes to Allah with a sincere heart (free from doubt and disbelief)
26|90|The paradise will be brought close at hand for the righteous
26|91|And for the misguided the hellfire shall be made (conspicuous and) fully visible
26|92|And they will be asked, "Where are those you used to worship
26|93|Other than Allah? Are they helping you now? Are they helping themselves
26|94|They, along with the misguided, will be toppled into the hellfire
26|95|As well as the armies of Iblees _ every one of them
26|96|There, they will quarrel with each other, and say
26|97|By Allah, we were clearly wrong
26|98|When we thought of you as equal to the Lord of the universe
26|99|Criminals they were who led us astray
26|100|Now we have no one to mediate (and plead our case)
26|101|Nor do we have an intimate friend
26|102|If only we had another chance, we would surely be among the believers
26|103|There is surely a sign in that, but most of them do not believe
26|104|Your Lord surely is the One Who is the most Powerful and the most Merciful
26|105|The nation of Nooh rejected the messengers
26|106|Their brother Nooh said to them, "Do you not fear (Allah)
26|107|Surely, I am a faithful (and a reliable) messenger for you
26|108|Fear Allah and obey me
26|109|In return, I do not seek any compensation from you. My reward exists only with the Lord of the universe
26|110|So, fear Allah and follow me
26|111|They said, "Shall we believe you? Only the humble humdrum (and the despised) are following you
26|112|(Nooh) said, "I have no knowledge of what they used to do
26|113|My Lord alone has the prerogative to judge them, if only you could realize
26|114|I am not going to drive away the believers
26|115|I am a warner _ plain and simple
26|116|They said, "Oh Nooh, if you did not stop, you would surely be cursed and sentenced to death by stoning
26|117|(Nooh) said, "My Lord, my people have rejected me
26|118|Pronounce your judgment between me and them; and rescue me and all the believers with me
26|119|So We rescued him and those with him aboard a laden ship
26|120|And after that, We drowned all those (unbelievers) left behind
26|121|In that is a sign, of course! Yet, most of them do not believe
26|122|And your Lord, surely, is the One Who is the most Powerful and the most Merciful
26|123|The people of ´Aads´ rejected the messengers
26|124|Their brother Hood said to them, "Do you not fear (Allah)
26|125|Of course, I am a faithful (and a reliable) messenger for you
26|126|So fear Allah and obey me
26|127|In return, I do not seek any compensation from you. My reward exists only with the Lord of the universe
26|128|At every raised spot you construct high palaces in vain, and to no avail
26|129|You take up (residence in) large structures as if you will live (in them) forever
26|130|And when you assault, you land on your victim with a vengeance
26|131|Fear Allah and follow me
26|132|Fear the One Who has imparted the knowledge you possess
26|133|And has provided you the cattle and the sons
26|134|The gardens and the springs
26|135|In fact, I fear that a torture of a severe day might come upon you
26|136|They said, "It makes no difference to us whether you preach or discontinue your sermons altogether
26|137|These are merely the fantasies of the earlier folks
26|138|We are not going to be punished
26|139|So they rejected the messenger and We destroyed them. In this, is a sign of course! But most of them do not believe
26|140|And indeed your Lord is the One Who is the most Powerful and the most Merciful
26|141|The people of ´Samood´ rejected the messengers
26|142|Their brother Saleh said to them, "Do you not fear (Allah)
26|143|Of course I am a faithful (and a reliable) messenger for you
26|144|So fear Allah and obey me
26|145|In return, I do not seek any compensation from you. My reward exists only with the Lord of the universe
26|146|Would you be allowed to stay in these comforts, forever secure
26|147|In these gardens and springs
26|148|And the green fields, and date trees with their succulent fruit
26|149|You carve homes out of mountains skillfully
26|150|So fear Allah and follow me
26|151|Do not obey the orders of the immoderate (and the unrestrained)
26|152|Those who spoil the morals (and spread corruption and depravity) on the earth, and do nothing to improve matters
26|153|They said, "Surely, you are one of the crazy persons
26|154|You are just a human being like us! Bring us a sign if you are telling the truth
26|155|(The messenger Saleh) said, "Here, (the sign) is this camel. On specified days, the source of water shall be solely for the camel, while on other days it will be yours
26|156|Do not cause it any harm, or else the punishment of a severe day will grab you
26|157|But they killed the camel; a decision they came to regret
26|158|A torment gripped them. There is a sign in that, of course! But most of them do not believe
26|159|Your Lord is surely the One Who is the most Powerful and the most Merciful
26|160|The nation of Loot rejected the messengers
26|161|Their brother Loot said to them, "Do you not fear (Allah)
26|162|I am surely a faithful (and a reliable) messenger for you
26|163|So fear Allah and obey me
26|164|In return, I do not seek any compensation from you. My reward exists only with the Lord of the universe
26|165|Do you commit (the sexual act) with the males in this world
26|166|And you forsake the mates that your Lord created for you? Indeed, you are a nation guilty of transcending the limits
26|167|They said, "If you did not stop, oh Loot, you would most certainly be expelled
26|168|He said, "I am certainly among those who loathe and abhor your deeds
26|169|He prayed, "My Lord! Save me and my family from (the evil of) what they do
26|170|So We saved him and all of his family
26|171|Except an old woman, _ Loot´s wife _ who stayed behind (with the evil doers)
26|172|After that We annihilated the rest of them
26|173|We doused them with a downpour (of brimstone)! A devastating evil rain (fell) upon those forewarned
26|174|There is surely a sign in this! But most of them do not believe
26|175|Your Lord is surely the One Who is the most Powerful and the most Merciful
26|176|And the people of ´Aika´ rejected the messengers
26|177|When Shoaib said to them, "Do you not fear (Allah)
26|178|I am surely a faithful (and a reliable) messenger for you
26|179|So fear Allah and obey me
26|180|In return, I do not seek any compensation from you. My reward exists only with the Lord of the universe
26|181|Fill the measure to its capacity. Do not inflict a loss (by supplying reduced amount)
26|182|And weigh with an accurate balance
26|183|Do not defraud people of their goods, and do not go about spreading corruption and immorality in this world
26|184|And fear the One Who created you as well as the earlier generations
26|185|They said, "You are one of the crazed men
26|186|You are only a human being like us. We definitely think of you as a liar
26|187|Or else, if you are telling the truth, cause a part of the sky to fall upon us
26|188|(The messenger, Shoaib) said, "My Lord is Aware of what you are doing
26|189|Thus, they rejected him. So, the punishment of the day of canopy (when dark clouds spread across like a canopy) grabbed them. It really was the punishment of a terrible day
26|190|There is surely a sign in this, but most of them do not believe
26|191|And your Lord is surely the One Who is the most Powerful and the most Merciful
26|192|This (Qur´an) is truly the revelation of the Lord of the universe
26|193|The reliable and the loyal angel brought it (and revealed it)
26|194|To your heart! So you may serve as a warner
26|195|It is in a plain and pristine Arabic language
26|196|Indeed, that (very same message) exists in the scriptures of the earlier people
26|197|And is it not a sufficient sign for them that (some of) the scholars of the Israelites also recognize it
26|198|Even if We had revealed this (Arabic Qur´an) upon a non-Arab
26|199|And even if that non-Arab was to recite it to them (in Arabic), they would still not believe
26|200|Thus, We lance this (Qur´an) through the hearts of the criminals
26|201|They will not believe, right until they see that painful punishment
26|202|Come upon them suddenly! They will not see it coming
26|203|Then they shall begin saying, "May we have some respite
26|204|Are they urging for Our punishment to be hastened
26|205|Have you given it a thought? (Even) if We let them enjoy (life) for years
26|206|And then the promised punishment comes to them
26|207|Would the years they spend in enjoyment be of any use to them
26|208|We never destroy any town unless it had a warner
26|209|A reminder! We are never unjust
26|210|It isn´t the Shaitans (the Devils) who came down with it _ (the Qur´an)
26|211|They are not worthy of it. Nor are they able (to do it)
26|212|Indeed, they are kept too far away to be able to hear it
26|213|Therefore, do not call any god along with Allah. Else, you will be among those being punished
26|214|Warn your closest relatives
26|215|And be kind to the believers who obey you
26|216|Should they disobey you, say, "Surely, I bear no blame for what you are doing
26|217|And place your trust in the most Powerful and the most Kind
26|218|The One Who watches you when you stand (in prayers)
26|219|And (watches) your movements among those who fall prostrate (along with you in prayers)
26|220|Indeed, it is He Who sees-all and knows-all
26|221|Shall I point out to you those upon whom the Shaitans _ (the devils) _ land
26|222|They descend upon all the lying sinners
26|223|And (they) feed them heresies; Most of them are liars
26|224|As for the poets, only the misguided ones heed them
26|225|Do you not see? These poets dabble in every subject and meander about with every thought
26|226|They do not practice what they proclaim
26|227|Except those who believe, perform good deeds, remember Allah a lot, and seek and redress only if they are unjustly wronged. Very soon the oppressors will come to know the means and manners by which they will be toppled
27|1|Ta, seen. These are the verses of the Qur´an _ a clear lucid book
27|2|A guidance and good news for the believers
27|3|Those who establish ´salat´ and pay ´zakat´. Those who are certain about the life-to-come
27|4|And there are those who do not believe in the afterlife. We make their deeds seem delightful to them. So they just wander about blindly
27|5|An evil torment is in store for such people. They are the ones who would be the losers in the afterlife
27|6|Indeed, you are definitely receiving this Qur´an from the Wise, the Knowledgeable
27|7|(Remember) when Musa said to his family, "I notice a fire at a distance. I will get you some information from there, or (at least) get you a live coal so you may stay warm
27|8|And when he got there a voice rang out, "Blessed is the One in the fire and all around it. Exalted is Allah, the Lord of the universe
27|9|Oh Musa! This is I, Allah, the most Powerful and the Wisest
27|10|Throw down your stick!" When (Musa) saw the stick wriggling about like a snake, he turned his back and ran, and did not look back. "Oh Musa do not be afraid! Indeed, in My presence a messenger has nothing to fear
27|11|Unless he commits an offense. Then, if he replaces the bad (deeds) with the good (deeds, he will find that) I am the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
27|12|Put your hand in your pocket. It will come out looking white without any (stain or) pain. (Another one of) nine signs for the pharaoh and his people. Indeed, they are a wanton sinful nation
27|13|But when Our signs reached them as clear proofs, they said, "This is an obvious magic
27|14|Their hearts were convinced, but they still rejected it unjustly and with arrogance. Now, see what became of the mischief mongers
27|15|Surely, We had granted Sulaiman and Daood a (special) knowledge. Both of them remarked, "All praise is for Allah Who excelled us over very many of His believing servants
27|16|Sulaiman inherited from Daood and remarked, "Oh you people, we have been imparted the (special) knowledge about the language of the birds, and we have been given all sorts of things. That is obviously a special gift
27|17|Armies of the jinn, humans and birds were gathered for Sulaiman. They were all given proper ranks
27|18|And as they set foot in the valley of the ants, one of the ants called out, "Oh all you ants! Go back home to your anthills. Otherwise, Sulaiman and his armies may trample you under their feet, and they might not know it
27|19|Amused by the ant´s remarks, Sulaiman smiled and said, "My Lord! Keep me under control, so that (instead of being pretentious) I may remain grateful for the blessings you showered upon me and my parents. So that I may perform the righteous deeds that please You. (Lord)! by Your Grace, let me join the group of Your righteous servants
27|20|(At another time) while inspecting a flock of birds, he said, "What is wrong? I do not see the swan here! Is he absent
27|21|Unless he gives me a valid reason (for his absence), I will either inflict a severe punishment on him, or just slit his throat
27|22|The swan did not stay (absent) for long. He said, "I have come across certain facts about which you know nothing. I bring you a reliable account from the land of Saba
27|23|There, I found that a woman rules over them. She has been given all sorts of things, and she has a splendid throne
27|24|I found her and her people worshipping the sun instead of Allah. Shaitan has made their deeds seem delightful to them. He alienates them from the (straight) path, so they do not find the way
27|25|That is because they do not prostrate before Allah Who reveals the unseen mysteries of the heavens and the earth. He knows what you hide and what you reveal
27|26|Allah! There is no god but He, the Lord of the great throne
27|27|(Sulaiman) said, "We will see if you told the truth or you happen to be a liar
27|28|Take this letter of mine and deliver it to them. Then retreat, and watch what reply they give in return
27|29|(The queen) said, "Oh my courtiers, a noteworthy letter has been delivered to me
27|30|It is from Sulaiman, and it begins with ´In the name of Allah, the most Merciful and the most Beneficent´
27|31|And says that, "You are not mightier (than me) so submit to me willingly
27|32|The queen said, "Oh my courtiers, give your opinion in this matter before me. I do not conclude any matter unless you are present (and unless I consult you, first)
27|33|They said, "We, as a nation, possess great strength and courage. But the decision is yours. Consider the situation and decide what you must
27|34|She said, "When the kings invade a land they undermine (its system), topple its respected and privileged class, and deem it to be despised and inferior. That is what they do
27|35|I am going to send him a gift. I will observe the response received by my envoys
27|36|When the envoys arrived (with their gifts), Sulaiman said, "Do you wish to increase my wealth (and get me to postpone my invasion)? What Allah has granted me is far superior to what He gave you. No! Keep your gifts and delight in them
27|37|Go back to them! We will surely attack them with our armies. They do not have enough power to resist. We will definitely expel them from the land, humbled and disparaged
27|38|(Sulaiman) said, "Oh you my courtiers, which one of you will bring me her throne before they yield and surrender to me
27|39|One of the strong jinn said, "I will bring it to you before you get up from your seat. I am surely reliable and strong enough for it
27|40|The one with the knowledge of the book said, "I will bring it to you in the blink of an eye." Right away, Sulaiman saw the throne placed nearby. He said, "All this is by the grace of my Lord Who tests me to see whether I show appreciation or display arrogance. The one who offers thanks surely does so for his own good. And if someone neglects to express gratitude, then Allah is indeed Generous and Free from all want
27|41|(Sulaiman) said, "Disguise her throne (and casually arrange) for her (to view it). Let us see! Would she recognize (her throne)? Or is she one of those who stay ignorant of reality
27|42|When she arrived she was asked, "Does that look like your throne?" She replied, "It sure seems like the one!" (Sulaiman observed) "We were given the knowledge before her. We obeyed and became Muslims
27|43|She was hindered because she used to worship those other than Allah. She belonged to an unbelieving nation
27|44|She was invited to enter the palace. When she looked at it, she thought it was a shallow water-filled pool. So, she lifted her skirt uncovering her legs. Sulaiman said, "This palace is really made of polished glass with water running underneath." She cried out, "My Lord, I have been unjust to myself. In the company of Sulaiman, I now surrender to Allah, the Lord of the universe
27|45|Towards the ´Samood´ We sent their brother Saleh (with instructions) to worship and obey Allah. Right away, that split them into two quarrelling groups
27|46|(Saleh) said, "Oh my people, why do you postpone the good, while you hasten to do evil? Why don´t you seek forgiveness from Allah? You may be granted mercy
27|47|They said, "We consider you and those with you as portents of evil." (Saleh) replied, "Your ill omen is with Allah! In fact, you are a nation being tested
27|48|There were nine groups of people in that town. Each one was busy spreading corruption in the land instead of carrying out reforms
27|49|They said to each other, "Let us swear by Allah, and be bound by the oath that: We will definitely assault him at night and (taking advantage of the surprise) put him and his family to death. Later on, we will tell his supporters that we were not present when his family was slain, and we are telling the truth
27|50|They hatched a sly scheme! But they had no idea. We played a trick of Our own
27|51|Look at it now! What was the outcome of their deception? We certainly destroyed them and their nation _ all of them together
27|52|As a result of their evil deeds, these houses of theirs lie empty and in ruin. Surely, there is a sign in it for a nation with knowledge
27|53|We rescued those who believed and were righteous
27|54|And behold, Loot said to his people, "Do you commit such utterly vile deeds? Even though you recognize it (to be an abomination)
27|55|Instead of women, do you turn to men to gratify your carnal urges? Indeed, you are an utterly foolish nation
27|56|His nation had no answer. Instead, they said, "Drive out the family of Loot from your town. They are folk who flaunt their chastity
27|57|But We rescued him and his family, except his wife. We decided she would be left behind
27|58|We heaped upon them a (wrenching) rain. What an evil rain for those forewarned
27|59|Say, "All praise is for Allah and peace be upon His servants _ those He has picked." (Say), "Who is better? Allah, or the partners you associate with Him
27|60|Isn´t it He Who created the heavens and the earth? Doesn´t He send water down from the sky, and with it, does He not produce splendid gardens? You do not make any of its trees grow! Are there gods besides Allah? Of course not! They are a nation ascribing other beings as equal (to Allah)
27|61|Isn´t it He who made the earth a stable place, ran rivers across its surface, caused immovable mountains to rise high and laid a barrier between the two seas? Are there gods besides Allah? Of course not! Most of them do not know
27|62|Isn´t it He Who responds to the call of the distressed and alleviates their suffering? Isn´t it He Who lets you inherit the earth? Are there gods besides Allah? You hardly think, or heed
27|63|Isn´t it He Who (guides and) shows you the way in the land and the sea, even when it is dark. The One Who sends winds heralding the good news of His mercy? Are there gods besides Allah? Exalted is Allah, far above all those they ascribe as His partners
27|64|Isn´t it He Who launched the creation (the first time)? Then, He will do it all over again! Isn´t it He Who (attends to your needs and) provides from the earth (below) and from the sky (above)? Are there gods besides Allah? Say, "Present your proof, if you are truthful
27|65|Say, "Absolutely no one in the heavens and on the earth knows the divine secrets, except Allah! Nobody has any idea when he (and everybody else) will be brought back to life
27|66|The knowledge of the life-to-come has eluded them. In fact, they are skeptical of its occurrence. Rather, they are oblivious of it
27|67|Those who have rejected say, "Will we really come back (to life)? After we and our forefathers have turned into dust
27|68|In the past, too, we were promised this, and so were our forefathers! These are really nothing but the tales of the earlier people
27|69|Tell them, "Move about in the land and observe. How (bad) did the criminals fare
27|70|Do not feel sorry for them, and do not feel depressed over their attempts to deceive
27|71|They say, "If you are honest tell us, when will that promise come about
27|72|Say, "Some of what you seek to hasten, may just happen to you next
27|73|Your Lord, of course, is the Lord of mercy (and He lavishly showers His favors) upon people. Yet, most of them fail to express gratitude
27|74|Your Lord certainly knows what their hearts hold back, just as well as what they declare
27|75|Every little secret in the heavens and on the earth is (committed to writing) in a clear record
27|76|Surely, for the children of Israel, this Qur´an clarifies most of the issues about which they differ
27|77|And for the believers it is certainly the guidance and the mercy
27|78|By His verdict, your Lord will settle (all issues) between them. He is the most Powerful and the all-Knowing
27|79|Place your trust in Allah! Of course, you are on the right track _ the plain and pristine truth
27|80|Surely, you cannot make the dead hear anything. Nor can you get the deaf to heed your call, if they turn their backs and run away
27|81|You cannot give directions to a blind man who has lost his way. You would only be able to tell those who believe and are ready to submit
27|82|When the time arrives for Our prophecy to come true, We will cause a beast to emerge from the earth and address them. Indeed, people did not believe Our signs (with certainty)
27|83|That day, from each generation We shall gather a huge crowd of those who had rejected Our signs. Then, they shall be divided into groups (according to the degree and nature of their sins)
27|84|When all have arrived, Allah will say, "You rejected My signs even though your knowledge consisted of nothing to the contrary? (If not) what else did you do
27|85|Because of their evil acts the torment, as per Our word, shall befall them. At that time, they will say nothing (in their defense)
27|86|Do they not observe? We made the night (dark) so they can rest in peace, and We made the day bright. In that, of course, are many signs for the people who believe
27|87|All shall be terror struck on the day the trumpet sounds _ everyone in the heavens and on the earth, except those whom Allah exempts. They will all come to Him, meek and subdued
27|88|You look at the mountains and see them fixed and motionless. But they move along swiftly, much like the passage of clouds. A handiwork of Allah! The One Who brought everything to perfection! He is certainly well Aware of what you are doing
27|89|He who does good shall get in return a far better reward. Such a person will be secure from the horrors of that day
27|90|Those who do evil will be tossed into the fire _ face down and head first. Could you face, as a consequence, anything other than what your deeds call for
27|91|I have been commanded to worship only the Lord of this town (Makkah), the One Who declared it holy. Everything belongs to Him! I have been commanded to be among those who submit and are obedient
27|92|(I have been ordered) to recite the Qur´an. Anyone who finds his way back, does so far his own good. To the one who goes astray say, "I am in fact, just a warner
27|93|And say, "All praise is for Allah! Very soon, He will show you His signs, and you will recognize them, too. Your Lord is not unaware of what you do
28|1|Ta, Seen, Meem
28|2|These are the verses of the illuminating book
28|3|For (the benefit of) the people who believe, We recite to you the true tale of Musa and the pharaoh
28|4|The pharaoh claimed himself exalted in the land, dividing its inhabitants into factions. He enslaved and enfeebled one group, putting their sons to death and letting their females live. Indeed, he was wicked
28|5|And, We wished to bestow Our favors upon those who were oppressed in the land, by granting them the leadership and having them inherit (the land)
28|6|And We wished to consolidate them in the land and show the pharaoh, his associate Haaman, and their forces exactly what they dreaded, the very thing they took precautions against
28|7|We sent a revelation to Musa´s mother. We said, "Nurse him! When you fear for his life, put him in the river. Do not be afraid. Nor feel sad! We are certainly going to bring him back to you. We are going to appoint him Our messenger
28|8|The family of pharaoh took him out of the river. (We arranged this) so he might become their enemy and a source of their grief. The pharaoh, Haaman, and their armies were habitual sinners
28|9|The pharaoh´s wife said, "He will be a joy for me and you! Do not put him to death! Perhaps he will bring us some benefit or we may adopt him as a son." They had no idea (what was to happen)
28|10|Musa´s mother had a sense of void; her heart ached and she almost gave herself away! But We fortified her heart so she may remain a firm believer
28|11|She said to the baby´s sister, "Follow him!" So, from a distance, the sister kept an eye on him. Nobody noticed her
28|12|We had already prevented all the wet nurses from being able to feed the infant. (His sister) said, "May I guide you to a family who would nurse and look after the baby for you? And also do it sincerely
28|13|Thus, We brought the infant back to his mother, so that she might feel comforted and not grieve, so that she might know, for sure, that Allah´s promise is a certainty, although most people do not understand
28|14|When Musa matured and came of age, We bestowed upon him the wisdom and the knowledge. This is how We reward those who perform good deeds
28|15|Once when the city was slumbering, (Musa) went into town and came across two men dueling. One belonged to his group the other to the enemy. The man who belonged to his group called for help against the one who belonged to his enemy. (Thus incited), Musa struck the enemy with his fist and killed him. He (repented and) said, "This is an act of Shaitan, who is an ardent enemy; and he misleads manifestly
28|16|He prayed, "I wrought a wrong against myself, my Lord! Forgive me!" And Allah forgave him. Indeed, He is oft Forgiving, the most Merciful
28|17|He prayed, "My Lord, in response to your favor upon me, I shall never be an ally of the criminals
28|18|Still apprehensive and trying to avoid trouble, Musa went into town the next morning. Suddenly, he ran into the same man who had sought his assistance a day earlier. Once again, he was calling for help (against another man). Musa responded, "Quite clearly, you are the quarrelsome one
28|19|Just as he was getting ready to strike the man who was their enemy, the man cried out, "Oh Musa, do you intend to kill me like you killed a man yesterday? You only want to flaunt your strength in the land; you do not want to set things right
28|20|From a distant town, a man came looking for Musa, and said, "Oh Musa, the chiefs have hatched a plot to kill you. So leave town! I am really one of your well-wishers
28|21|So, afraid and apprehensive, he left town and said, "My Lord, save me from the oppressive people
28|22|As he headed towards Madyan he said, "Perhaps, my Lord would guide me on to the right path
28|23|Musa came to the town of Madyan. Near the water supply, he found a group of men supplying their cattle with water. Close by, he found two women trying to keep their animals from drinking. Musa asked, "What is the matter?" They replied, "We cannot take our turn until all other shepherds have supplied their herd. Our father is very old
28|24|Musa took care of their animals. Then, he sat in a shade and said, "My Lord, I am poverty struck; in (desperate) need of whatever good You may grant me
28|25|Musa saw one of the two young women walking demurely towards him. She said, "My father wants to see you. He wants to compensate you for taking care of our animals." Musa saw their father and narrated all that had happened to him (in Egypt). The man said, "Do not be afraid. You have escaped the oppressing nation
28|26|One of the two girls said, "Oh father, hire him! Indeed, the best person to hire is the one who is faithful and firm
28|27|The man said, "I want you to marry one of my daughters, provided you work for me for eight years _ ten, if you prefer. That is up to you! I do not want to be harsh on you. Allah willing, you will find me a righteous person
28|28|Musa said, "So, it is settled between you and me. I shall complete one of the two terms. Beyond that, let there be no obligation upon me. Allah is the Guarantor of what we decide
28|29|When Musa completed the term, he moved on with his family. And while traveling, (Musa) perceived a fire burning at the foot of the mountain Toor. He said to his family, "Stay here, I see a fire! Perhaps I can bring back some news from there or a burning log to keep you warm
28|30|When he came to the sacred site on the right side of the valley, a voice called out from a tree, "Oh Musa, I am Allah, the Lord of the universe
28|31|Throw down your stick!" When he saw it wriggling like a snake, he turned away and ran, and did not glance back. "Oh Musa, come closer! Do not be afraid! Of course, you are safe
28|32|Stick your hand in your pocket! It will come out dazzling white without any pain (or stain). To rid yourself of fear, brace your hand to your side. These are two proofs from your Lord for the pharaoh and his chiefs. They are indeed a disobedient people
28|33|(Musa) said, "My Lord, I have killed one of their men. I am afraid they will kill me
28|34|My brother, Haroon, is more fluent in speech than I am. Send him along to reinforce me. He will give credence to my claim. I am afraid they will reject me
28|35|(Allah) said, "We will bolster your strength with your brother, and We will grant you the power so they would be unable to hurt you. Because of Our signs, you two and those who follow you will triumph
28|36|But when Musa brought to them Our clear signs, they said, "This is only a trumped up magic. Such things were never heard of during the times of our forefathers
28|37|Musa said, "My Lord knows quite well all those who brought the guidance from Him. They would have the happy consequences in the afterlife. The wrongdoers (on the other hand) shall not prosper
28|38|The pharaoh said, "Oh my courtiers, I do not think you have any other god besides me. Oh Haaman, start a fire and bake clay (bricks) over it. Then build me a towering castle. Perhaps, (from atop that castle) I might be able to see the God of Musa! I really think he is a liar
28|39|The pharaoh and his army deemed themselves great in this world; and without justification, they displayed arrogance. They thought they did not have to come back to Us
28|40|So We grabbed him and his army, and flung them into the sea. Notice (carefully)! What was the final end of the tyrants
28|41|We made them the leaders inviting others towards the hellfire. On the Day of Judgment, they shall receive no help
28|42|We had a curse follow them in this life. On the Day of Judgment they will be disgraced and discredited
28|43|After destroying the earlier generations, We gave Musa the book _ a guidance, a mercy and enlightenment for the people. Perhaps they might remember
28|44|You were not there on the western slopes (of the mountain) where We gave Musa the commandments! You were not a witness
28|45|After them, We raised many generations. A long time has gone by since then. You were not living in Madyan to recite Our verses to them. Rather, it is We Who really reveals these events to you
28|46|You were not there at the side of (the mountain) Toor when We called (Musa). But this revelation is a blessing from your Lord, so you may warn your nation. Prior to you, We had not sent them a warner. Perhaps they would bear that in mind
28|47|If a torment had hit them as a result of their own doing, they would have said, "Our Lord, why did You not send us a messenger. We would have followed Your signs and would have been among the believers
28|48|When the truth came to them from Us they said, "Why wasn´t he granted a miracle of the kind conferred upon Musa. But earlier, hadn´t they rejected what Musa was given? They said, "Both are magicians, each promoting the other
28|49|Tell them, "Go ahead! Present a book from Allah which has a better guidance than these two _ (the Qur´an and the Torah)! If so, if you are true to your word, follow it
28|50|And if they do not respond. know it for sure that they are worshipping their own whims and wishes. Who can be worse than the one following his own lusts instead of the guidance of Allah. Indeed, Allah does not guide the evildoers
28|51|We have certainly conveyed to them the word, so that they will bear in mind
28|52|Those to whom We gave the book previously, (recognize it and) do believe it
28|53|When it (the Qur´an) is read to them, they say, "We believe it! It is the truth from our Lord! Indeed, even prior to this, we were the obedient ones (Muslims)
28|54|Such believers will receive their rewards twice because they remained steadfast, strove against evil by performing good deeds and spend (for Our sake) out of the wealth granted by Us
28|55|When they hear the silly and the obscene, they turn away and say, "We have our deeds and you have yours. Peace be to you! We do not seek (the company of) the irrational ones
28|56|You can not impart guidance to the one you like. Rather, it is Allah Who guides whom He wants. He is better Aware of those who follow guidance
28|57|They say, "If we follow your guidance, we will be swept off our land." Did We not render their sacred land a safe haven? As provisions by Our Grace, do We not make fruits and benefits of all kinds pour into the land? But most of them do not understand
28|58|Many a towns have We destroyed! Their residents gloated over their (superior) way of life. Here are their houses, now! Few have lived in them since. It was We Who took over their possessions
28|59|Your Lord would not destroy any town without first raising in its midst, a messenger and having him recite Our verses to them. He would not destroy a town unless its residents were unjust evildoers
28|60|The possessions you have been granted are merely the provisions and adornments of the life of this world. What exists with Allah is far better and permanent. Do you not understand
28|61|(Consider these two)! To the one We pledged excellent rewards, which he shall soon find true. We had the other enjoy the provisions of the life of this world, and on the Day of Judgment he shall be brought up (for punishment). Can one be like the other
28|62|The day He summons them He will ask, "Where are My partners _ those you claimed
28|63|Those for whom the verdict is passed will say, "Our Lord, they are the ones we misled. We led them astray, just like we lost our way. In Your presence, we wash our hands off them. They did not worship us at all
28|64|They will be told, "Call your partners!" And call they will! But they shall hear no response. Instead, they will see the torment! If only they had adopted the guidance
28|65|The day He summons them all, He will ask, "What answer did you give to the messengers
28|66|On that day, all explanations (and excuses) will elude them. They shall be unable to consult each other
28|67|Except the one who repents, then believes and performs good deeds! Such a one would perhaps be successful
28|68|Your Lord creates what He wants and selects (for His mercy whomever He wills). The choice isn´t theirs! Exalted is Allah, far above all those they ascribe as His partners
28|69|Your Lord knows what their hearts conceal, and (not just) what they declare
28|70|He is Allah! There is none worthy of worship except He. All praise is due Him _ here and in the hereafter! The command and control belong to Him, and to Him you shall all have to return
28|71|Say, "Have you ever pondered? If, till the Day of Judgment, Allah makes the night settle over you permanently, are there gods besides Allah who can fetch the light back for you? So do you not listen attentively
28|72|Say, "Have you ever pondered? If, till the Day of Judgment, Allah makes the day stand still constantly, is there another god besides Allah, who could fetch the night back for you, so you could rest in peace? Do you, then, not think at all
28|73|By His grace, He has created both for you: the night so you may have rest and peace, and the day so you may seek His bounties. Perhaps you would express gratitude
28|74|The day He summons them, He will ask, "Where are My partners _ those you counted on
28|75|From each generation We will bring out a witness, and We will say, "Present your proof!" There, they will know for sure that the absolute truth belongs to Allah. All the lies they make up will disappear
28|76|Qaroon belonged to the people of Musa, but he turned traitor against his own people. We had granted him so many treasures. Carrying all the keys of these treasures would wear down even a band of strong men. His people said to him, "Do not let it go to your head. Indeed, Allah does not like those who gloat and flaunt
28|77|Seek a place in the afterlife with the wealth Allah has granted you, but of course do not neglect your share in this life. Allah has been good to you. So perform good deeds in return. Do not spread mischief in the land. Indeed, Allah does not like the one who spreads mischief
28|78|(Qaroon) replied, "Whatever I have been granted is because of the knowledge I possess." Did he not know that Allah has destroyed many in the past generations, who were better than him in strength and the abundance of wealth. The criminals are not asked about their sins (before it is time)
28|79|He appeared among his people with great pomp and show. Those who sought and preferred the life of this world said, "Alas! If only we had everything Qaroon has been given! He is extremely fortunate
28|80|Those who were given (the real) knowledge said, "Woe to you! the reward of Allah is much better for those who believe and do the righteous deeds. It is the patient ones who receive that wealth
28|81|Finally, We made the earth swallow him up as well as his house. There wasn´t a group who could rush to help him against Allah. Nor could he help himself
28|82|Those who longed to be in his shoes just a day earlier, began to say, "Alas, we forgot! Allah expands and restricts the provisions of life for whomever He wants amongst His servants. Had Allah not been kind to us, He would have sunk us too! Alas, we forgot! The unbelievers will never prosper
28|83|We will reserve the houses of the hereafter exclusively for those who do not seek self-glory in this life and do not cause oppression and corruption to spread. The final outcome belongs to those who fear (Allah)
28|84|Those who perform good deeds shall in return receive rewards far greater in worth. Those who do evil (and vile) deeds would not be punished in excess of what their actions deserve
28|85|The One Who ordained this Qur´an upon you would certainly bring you back to your cherished destination (the paradise). Say, "My Lord knows much better those who have accepted guidance, and those who remained misguided
28|86|You did not expect that the scriptures would be revealed to you. It is (nothing but) the Mercy of your Lord. So do not become a source of support to the unbelievers
28|87|Do not ever let them deter you from (preaching) the verses of Allah after they are revealed to you. (Continue to preach) and call others towards (the way of) your Lord. Do not be among those associating partners with Allah
28|88|Excepting Allah, do not call any one else. There is no god but He. (No one except He merits submission). Everything in this universe except His face, will perish. To Him belongs the Command, and to Him will you all be brought back
29|1|Alif, Laam, Meem
29|2|Are people of the opinion that once they said, ´we believe´ they would be left alone and not be put to a test
29|3|We had certainly tested those before them. Allah definitely has to sift those who are true to their words from those who are liars
29|4|Do those indulging in vile deeds assume that they are getting the better of Us? Utterly false is what they decide
29|5|Those hoping to meet Allah should note that the scheduled meeting with Allah is really certain to take place. He hears everything, and knows everything
29|6|Whoever strives, does so for his own self. Of course, Allah is (Free of want and) dependent upon no one in the world for anything
29|7|We will mend all the shortcomings of those who believe and do good deeds. We would certainly cleanse (and rid) them of their sins, and We would grant them the best of rewards according to the deeds they performed
29|8|We have directed man to treat his parents with compassion. But do not obey if they force you to associate partners with Me _ something you have no knowledge of! Towards Me is your final retreat. Then, I will let you know everything you have been doing
29|9|We would certainly usher those who believe and do good deeds into the group of the righteous ones
29|10|And among the people are those who say, ´we believe in Allah!´, but when they are bothered because of their belief in Allah they consider the suffering caused by the people to be equal to the punishment inflicted by Allah. If victory comes from Allah, they will say, "Of course, we were with you." Isn´t Allah aware of whatever lies in the heart of everyone in the world
29|11|Allah definitely knows the ones who believe, and He definitely knows the hypocrites
29|12|The unbelievers say to the believers, "Follow our way (of life). Let us assume your sins." But they are not going to take over a single one of anybody´s sins. They are most certainly lying
29|13|They surely carry the weight of their own sins, and also that of others whom they misled. Burdens to add to their own load! On the Day of Judgment, they will most certainly be asked about the lies they used to invent
29|14|We had sent Nooh to his people and he stayed with them for nine hundred and fifty years. Then, a storm grabbed them. They were all evil doers
29|15|But We rescued (Nooh and) those in the ship with him. We made them a sign for the whole world
29|16|(We had sent) Ibraheem! He said to his people, "Worship Allah, and fear Him. That is better for you if you know
29|17|Those others you worship besides Allah are statues. You have carved (and vested) lies (with the statues)! Indeed, those you worship instead of Allah have no power to grant you anything. Seek your provisions from Allah, obey Him and be grateful to Him. Towards Him you shall have to return
29|18|In case you reject (remember), several other nations before you had also rejected. There is no obligation upon Our messenger except to convey the message explicitly
29|19|Do they not observe how Allah originates the creation, and then how He renews it? Indeed, this is easy for Him
29|20|Say, "Move about in the land and see how He originates the creation. Allah will call the creation into existence yet another time. Indeed, Allah is capable of doing everything
29|21|He punishes whom He wants, and He spares whom He wants. Towards Him, you all shall be turned around
29|22|You cannot undermine (Allah) on the earth, or in the heavens. You do not have any friend or helper other than Allah
29|23|Those refusing to believe the verses of Allah and the scheduled meeting with Him, are those who have lost hope for His mercy. There exists a painful punishment for them
29|24|But Ibraheem´s nation had no response except to yell, "Kill him or burn him at the stake." Allah, however, saved him from the fire. In that are surely signs for the believing nation
29|25|Instead of Allah, you have accepted the idols to be the basis of your love and friendship in the life of this world. But on the day of resurrection you would repudiate each other, and you would curse each other. Hellfire will be your abode, and you will have no supporters
29|26|Loot believed in Him and said, "I will surely begin my journey towards Allah. He is the most Powerful and the Wisest
29|27|We gave Ibraheem sons like Ishaq and Yaqoob, and We blessed his descendants with the prophethood and the book. We gave him his reward in this life. Surely, in the afterlife he will be amongst the righteous
29|28|(We also sent) Loot! He said to his nation, "Indeed, you have perpetrated an act so vile and evil that nobody prior to you had ever committed such an act in this world
29|29|Aren´t you the ones who come to men (for sex), engage in highway robbery and perform reprehensible acts in your gatherings?" His nation had no response except to say, "If you are truthful, have the punishment of Allah come upon us
29|30|He said, "My Lord! Help me against the sinful nation
29|31|When Our angels came and brought Ibraheem the good news (the prophecy of the two sons), they said, "We are going to destroy the members of that community. Indeed, its residents are evil
29|32|(Ibraheem) said, "Loot is there!" They replied, "We know who is there! We are definitely going to rescue him and his family, except his wife. She is to be among those staying behind
29|33|When Our angels came to Loot, he felt bad and became uneasy about them. They said, "Do not be afraid, and do not grieve. We are surely going to rescue you and your family, except your wife. She is to be among those staying behind
29|34|We are going to rain down upon the residents of this town a punishment from the sky. This is because they lead a depraved and decadent life
29|35|We have left their traces to serve as clear signs for any nation that follows reason
29|36|(We sent) towards the nation of Madyan, their brother, Shoaib. He said, "Oh people, worship Allah, rely on the Day of Judgment, and do not act wickedly in this world seeking mischief
29|37|But they rejected him! So an earthquake shook them up, leaving them (dead) _ prone and prostrate in their houses
29|38|(And We destroyed) ´Aads´ and the ´Samoods´; their ruined dwellings are quite well known. Shaitan made their deeds appear delightful to them. Although they were endowed with reason and intellect, yet Shaitan diverted them from the (straight) path
29|39|(And We destroyed) Qaroon, the pharaoh and Haaman. Indeed, Musa had presented them the plain proofs. But they proclaimed themselves great in the land. They could not outrun (Our punishment)
29|40|Thus, We took all of them to task for their sins. We sent a cyclone on some of them and an overwhelming bang seized others among them. We made the ground swallow some of them and there were those amongst them whom We drowned. Allah was not cruel to them. Rather, they used to treat themselves unjustly
29|41|Those who take patrons other than Allah (and feel secure) may be likened to a spider that spins its home. Of course the flimsiest home is the web of the spider, if only they know
29|42|Allah really knows well whomever and whatever they pray to other than Him. He is the most Powerful and the Wisest
29|43|We quote the examples for the people. Only those with knowledge understand them
29|44|Allah has created the heavens and the earth with justice (and a purpose). In that is surely a sign for those who believe
29|45|Recite the book revealed to you and establish ´salat´. Indeed the ´salat´ keeps one away from vile deeds and prohibited acts. The remembrance of Allah is greater still! Allah knows what you do
29|46|If you argue with the people of the scriptures, do it in an amicable manner. But (do not argue) with those of them who are unjust and unfair. Say to them, "We believe in that which is sent to us, and that which was sent to you. Our God and your God is only One, and to Him we submit (we are Muslims)
29|47|Thus, We have revealed this book to you. (Some of) those to whom We gave the book earlier, also believe it. Among others too, are those who believe it. Only the (most ardent) unbelievers reject Our signs
29|48|Oh messenger! Before this you never read a book. Nor did you ever write anything with your hand. Otherwise, the biased ones would have raised questions and doubts
29|49|In fact, these are manifest proofs to (settle and satisfy) the hearts of those who were given the knowledge. Only the evil doers repudiate Our verses
29|50|(Yet) they say, "Why did a miracle from his Lord not come down to him." Say, "Indeed, the miracles are all with Allah, I am evidently a warner
29|51|Isn´t it enough that We revealed to you the book, which is being read to them. It is really a mercy and the right advice for the believing people
29|52|Say, "Allah is sufficient as a witness between me and you. He knows everything in the heavens and on the earth. The losers are those who believe in absurd lies, and disbelieve Allah
29|53|(As a taunt), they dare you to hasten the punishment! Its time is specified; else that torment would strike (right away). It will certainly come upon them suddenly (and stealthily), and they won´t even realize
29|54|They dare you to hasten their punishment? The hellfire has certainly seized (and sealed in) the unbelievers from all sides
29|55|On the day it strikes, the punishment will come down to wrap them from above, and will rise from under their feet (to engulf them); He will say, "Here, taste (the result of) what you used to do
29|56|Oh my servants who believe! Really, this earth of Mine is spacious! So worship no one but Me
29|57|All living beings must taste death! Then, towards Us you have to return
29|58|We will accommodate all those who believe and do the righteous deeds into the high places in paradise. Rivers run right through it. There, they will reside forever! What an excellent reward for those who act (righteously)
29|59|Those who are patient and place their trust in their Lord
29|60|Look at all these animals. They do not carry their sustenance with them. Allah feeds them! And He provides you, too. He hears, and He knows everything
29|61|If you were to put them this question, "Who created the heavens and the earth, and who tamed the sun and the moon?", they will respond, "Allah!" Say, "So why then, are you being deceived
29|62|Allah expands the provisions _ or limits them _ for any of His servants He wants. Allah is, indeed Knowledgeable of everything
29|63|If you were to put them this question, "Who sent water down from the sky and revived the dead and barren land with it", they will respond, "Allah!" Say, "All praise is for Allah!" But most of them fail to understand and ponder
29|64|The life of this world is nothing but (a brief) play and pastime. But the house of the hereafter is surely the (real) life. Alas! If only they knew
29|65|When they board a ship (to go overseas), they forsake all others and invoke Allah with sincerity and devotion. When He brings them safely back to land, they go back to ascribing partners to Allah
29|66|To be ungrateful for the favors We granted them! And to immerse themselves in merriment! Very soon, they will come to know
29|67|Do they not see that We have made this town a safe haven, while the people all around are being struck down and swept away? They believe in absurd lies, and show ingratitude for the blessings of Allah
29|68|Who could be more wrong than the one inventing lies about Allah, or the one who calls the truth a lie, even when the truth is disclosed to him. Is there no place in hell for such unbelievers? Of course, there is
29|69|We will surely guide on to Our path those who strive for Our sake. Allah is definitely on the side of the righteous ones
30|1|Alif, Laam, Meem
30|2|Romans have been defeated
30|3|In the neighboring lands! But after being defeated they will emerge victorious
30|4|Within ten years! To Allah belong the decision and the decree prior to this (event) and later. That day, the believers would rejoice
30|5|Over the victory granted by Allah. He helps whom He wants. And He is the most Powerful and the most Merciful
30|6|(It is) Allah´s promise! Allah does not go back on His words, but most people just do not know
30|7|In the life of this world, they know only the manifest, the perceptible. They are heedless of the afterlife
30|8|Do they not ponder about their own selves? Allah has created the heavens and the earth, and everything in between for a specific purpose and a predetermined period. But most people just fail to accept (the inevitability of) the meeting with their Lord (on the Day of Judgment)
30|9|Have they not moved about in the land, so they could observe the fate of the people before them? They were stronger, tilled the land better and populated the earth much more than these present day unbelievers have. Their messengers brought them clear proofs! Allah was not going to oppress them, but they used to treat their own selves unjustly
30|10|Then those doing evil fared an evil fate, because they rejected the signs of Allah and used to make fun of them
30|11|Allah began the (process of) creation. And He will renew it! Then, you would be returned to Him
30|12|The criminals would despair and lose all hope on the day the hour (of Judgment) is established
30|13|They will not have the partners (they now ascribe to Allah) to plead on their behalf. (In fact), they will renounce those partners
30|14|The day the hour (of Judgment) begins, is the day they will split into groups
30|15|Those who believe and do good deeds will be settled in the garden of delight, and would be kept blissfully happy
30|16|Those who disbelieved and rejected Our signs (Our verses), the (scheduled) meeting with Us, and the afterlife, will be made to stay in the torment (permanently)
30|17|Therefore, glorify Allah when the evening approaches, and then again when it is the morning
30|18|All praise in the heavens and the earth is for Him. (So glorify Him) prior to sunset and after noon
30|19|He causes the living to emerge from the lifeless, and brings the lifeless out of the living. He revives the earth after its death. In that same manner you, too, will be brought out (from the dead)
30|20|One of His signs: He created you from dust. Now here you are, humans multiplying and spreading out
30|21|Another one of His signs: He created wives for you from amongst your kind, so you may have peace and tranquility. (No one but) He kindles love and compassion between you and your wife. Of course, there is a sign in it for any nation that ponders
30|22|Among His signs are the creation of the heavens and the earth, the diversity of your languages and the variety of your skin color. In that are surely signs for those with (reason and) knowledge
30|23|One of His signs is your sleep during the night and the day and your quest for his bounties (livelihood). In that are surely signs for a nation that listens (attentively)
30|24|And He shows you one of His signs, the bolts of lightning (which you observe) with fear and hope. From the sky He sends down water, and with it He brings the land _ after it had (withered and) died _ back to life. Surely, in that are signs for any nation that understands
30|25|Another one of His signs: the heavens and the earth stay in existence by His command! Later on, He will call you just once, and you (all) will come out of the earth instantly
30|26|Everyone in the heavens and the earth is His servant! Each one obeys Him
30|27|It is He Who begins the creation. And then He will renew it! That is easy for Him. The most excellent attributes in the heavens and the earth belong to Him. He is the most Powerful, and the Wisest
30|28|He gives you an example from among you. Do you treat any of your slaves as your partners? Do you share with them equally the wealth We have granted you? Do you fear them as you would fear others like yourself? Thus, We explain Our signs for the nation that has sense
30|29|Rather, the evil doers are following their desires without thinking. Who can guide those Allah has led astray? They will have no supporters (on the Day of Judgment)
30|30|Therefore, forsaking all else stay firm on this religion. It suits the innate character and the very instincts with which Allah has created the human kind. Let there be no violation of the natural laws of Allah. This is the straight and true religion! But most people do not know
30|31|(Stay firm), turning to Him in repentance! Fear Him, establish the ´salat´, and do not be among the ´mushriqeen´ _ (those associating partners with Allah)
30|32|(Don´t be one of) those who divided their religion into many sects, each happy and contented with what it holds
30|33|When a calamity strikes mankind, they call their Lord and turn to Him in repentance. When He lets them taste His mercy, many of them go back to ascribing partners to their Lord
30|34|(Do they do this) to show ingratitude for everything We have granted them? Go ahead and enjoy! Soon you will find out
30|35|Did We send them an authority that condones their acts of associating partners (with Allah)
30|36|People are joyous when We let them taste Our mercy, but become despondent when trouble suddenly strikes them as a result of their own doings
30|37|Do they not see? Allah increases the provisions _ or limits them _ for whomever He wants! In that are surely signs for any nation that believes
30|38|Grant the due rights to your near ones, the poor and the wayfarer. That is better for those who seek the pleasure of Allah. They are the successful ones
30|39|You pay interest to the people in order to increase their wealth, but it does not exceed (in value) according to Allah. Yet, the ´zakat´ you give seeking the pleasure of Allah increases manifold (in value)
30|40|It is Allah Who created you and provided for you. Then, He will give you death, and then He will bring you back to life. Is there any among the partners (you ascribe to Allah) who does that? Glorified is He! Far above all the partners (they ascribe)
30|41|Corruption has appeared in the land and in sea because of what people have done to themselves. Now, He will make them taste the result of some of their deeds. Perhaps they might turn back
30|42|Say, "Move about in the land and observe the fate of the earlier ones. Most of them were ´mushriqeens´ _ (those worship others along with Allah)
30|43|So, keep your focus on the straight and simple religion right until that day. Its arrival will not be called off by Allah. That day people will split (into groups)
30|44|The (punishment of) disbelief is upon the one who disbelieves. And those who do good deeds are actually clearing their way (to paradise)
30|45|So, by His grace, He will reward those who believe and do good deeds. Indeed, He does not like the unbelievers
30|46|One of His signs: He sends winds that carry the good news, so He may make you taste His mercy! So that, by His command the boats may sail, and you may seek His bounties. Perhaps you will express gratitude
30|47|(Oh messenger) surely, prior to you We had sent other messengers to their people. They brought their people clear proofs. Then, We exacted revenge from those who committed sins. It is incumbent upon Us to help the believers
30|48|It is Allah Who sends the winds, which raise the clouds. He then spreads them in the sky, as He wants. He makes (the weather) dark and downcast, and eventually you see the raindrops trickling down from the clouds. He causes rain to pour down upon such of His servants, as He wants. They feel happy
30|49|Prior to it, they may have given up hope before the rain actually pours down
30|50|So look at the effects of (the mercy of) Allah. (Look at) how He grants new life to the land after its death. Undoubtedly, He will bring the dead back to life. He is capable of accomplishing everything
30|51|If We send (a special) wind and leave (their crops) pale yellow, they will (swear and curse, and) continue to disbelieve
30|52|Of course, you cannot make the dead hear you. Nor can you make the deaf hear your call, (particularly) when they turn their backs to avoid you
30|53|Nor can you (point out the right way and) steer the blind away from his wandering path. You can only inform and advise those who believe in Our signs and are ready to submit
30|54|It is Allah Who created you as a frail and feeble form _ (an infant). Then He lets your weakness evolve into strength. After that, He (again) makes your strength dwindle into a state of weakness _ a senile old age! He creates whatever He wants! He is all Knowing, the Omnipotent
30|55|The criminals will swear on the day the hour (of Judgment) is held, that they stayed (dead) for just a brief while. Thus (in their lives, too) they were deceived
30|56|Those granted the knowledge and belief will say, "As per the book of Allah, you have stayed till the day of resurrection, and this is the day of resurrection! But, you remained unaware
30|57|On that day, the apologies and excuses will not benefit those who do evil. They will not even be asked to seek forgiveness
30|58|In this Qur´an, We have explained people (the truth) in every possible way. Indeed, if you brought them a miracle they will surely say, "You are only playing tricks on us
30|59|Thus, Allah seals the hearts of those who stay unaware
30|60|(So, oh messenger), stay patient (against provocation)! Allah´s promise is real! Let not those who lack faith find you soft, and short on courage
31|1|Alif, Laam, Meem
31|2|These are the verses of the Book of wisdom
31|3|A guidance and mercy for the righteous
31|4|Those who establish the ´salat´ and the ´zakat´. Those who are certain about the life-to-come
31|5|Those are really the ones rightly guided by their Lord, and those are the successful ones
31|6|Among men, there are some who, without any knowledge, purchase distracting tales (and trivial pursuits and pastimes) in order to lead people away from the path of Allah. They make fun of it (Qur´an). Indeed, there exists a humiliating punishment for such persons
31|7|He turns away arrogantly when Our verses are read to him, as if he did not hear them, or as if both of his ears were afflicted with deafness. To such a one, announce the news of a painful punishment
31|8|Of course, the bounteous paradise is for those who believe and do good deeds
31|9|They will live in it for ever. The promise of Allah is firm, indeed. He is the most Powerful, the Wisest
31|10|He created the heavens without any pillars you could see. He pegged the earth firmly with the mountains, lest it makes you sway and swing. He dispersed all kinds of animals on the earth. He sent water down from the sky, and raised all sorts of exotic plants in the land
31|11|Such is the creation of Allah! Show me what others besides Him have created. Indeed, the evildoers are clearly on a misguided course
31|12|He had certainly granted ´Luqman´ the wisdom. (He said), "Be thankful to Allah!". Indeed, the gratitude of the one who offers thanks is for his own good!" And if anyone is not grateful, (let him remember that) Allah is Free of all wants and Worthy of all praise
31|13|(Remember) Luqman said to his son by way of advice, "Oh my son, do not associate partners with Allah. Indeed, such an act _ ´shirk´ _ is the greatest injustice
31|14|We have made the (care of) parents incumbent upon man. His mother carried him through the fatigue (of pregnancy) followed by the hardship (of labor). And the weaning takes two (more) years. Thank Me and your parents. (Remember)! Towards Me is your return
31|15|Yet if they, (your parents), compel you to commit ´shirk´ (associate partners) with Me _ something you have no knowledge of _ then do not obey. Deal with them in this life with kindness and courtesy, but follow the path of the one who turns to Me in repentance. Towards Me is your retreat! Then, I will relate to you what you used to do
31|16|(Luqman said), "Oh my son, Allah will bring out (into full view) even a tiny bit of a mustard seed, regardless of whether it happens to be in the heavens or on earth, or embedded in a rock. Indeed, Allah is the One minutely and fully Aware, and the most Elegant
31|17|Oh my son, establish ´salat´, enjoin the good, forbid the evil (and the vile), and bear with fortitude whatever ill afflicts you. Indeed, these are the vital and quintessential commands
31|18|Do not talk to people contemptuously, nor walk insolently on the earth. Surely, Allah does not like a haughty braggart
31|19|Rather, be modest when you walk and keep your voice subdued when you talk. Indeed, the harshest of all voices is that of a donkey
31|20|Do you not observe? Allah has tamed for your benefit everything in the heavens and on the earth. He has bestowed ample favors upon you _ those that are perceptible as well as those that lie hidden. Among the people there are some who argue about Allah without any knowledge, guidance or an enlightening book
31|21|They are being asked to obey that which Allah has revealed. In response they say, "No! We would rather practice that, upon which we found our forefathers." Would they still follow this practice, even if they find ´Shaitan´ inviting them towards the punishment of fire
31|22|He who resigns and hands over his affairs to Allah _ provided he is righteous _ has indeed latched on to a secure and dependable support. The final disposition of all matters rests with Allah
31|23|There are those who disbelieve. (But) don´t let their disbelief cause you grief. Towards Us is their return! Then, We will tell them about everything they have been doing. Indeed, Allah is (also) Aware of what lies hidden in their hearts
31|24|We will let them enjoy for a brief while. Then, We will drag them into a severe punishment
31|25|If you ask them, ´who created the heavens and the earth?´, they would surely respond, "Allah!" Say, "Al Hamdo Lillah!" _ ("All praise is for Allah!"). But most of them do not know
31|26|To Allah belongs everything in the heavens and on the earth. Indeed, Allah is Free of all wants! And Worthy of all praise
31|27|The discourse about Allah would not conclude even if all the trees on this earth were made into pens and the entire sea served as ink. Not even if additional ink worth seven more seas was provided as a refill. Indeed, Allah is the most Powerful and the Wisest
31|28|The creation (of all of you) and then your resurrection, is just like (the creation and resurrection of) a single being. Indeed Allah hears all, and He sees all
31|29|Do you not observe? Allah causes the night to take over the day, and He pushes the day over the night. He tamed the sun and the moon. Each of them is in motion for a specified term. Allah is well Aware of everything you do
31|30|That is so, because Allah is the absolute truth, and besides Allah every one else they pray to is utterly false. Indeed, it is Allah Who is the Exalted and the Eminent
31|31|Do you not observe? It is due to His favor, and in order to show you His signs, that the ships sail on the sea. In that are surely signs for every steadfast and grateful person
31|32|They call Allah when (in the high seas) the waves cover them over like a canopy. (At that time) they forsake all others (and resolve) to let their religion be exclusively for Him. However, when We rescue them (and bring them) back to land, some of them compromise and fall short (of true belief). Indeed, those refuting Our signs are the swindling ungrateful cheats
31|33|Oh you people! Fear your Lord and dread that day when a father would not make amends for (the sins of) the son, and the son would not atone for (the sins of) his father. Allah´s promise is indeed absolutely true! Do not let the life of this world dazzle you! Do not let that great deceiver (Shaitan) mislead you about Allah
31|34|Indeed, the knowledge of the (exact) hour (of Judgment) is with Allah. It is He Who sends down the rain. He knows that which is (growing) in the wombs. No living being is aware of what it will earn the next day. No living being knows, in what land will it die. But indeed, Allah knows it all! He is aware of everything
32|1|Alif, Laam, Meem
32|2|The revelation of this book is from the Lord of the universe. There is no doubt about this (at all)
32|3|Do they say he has made it all up? On the contrary, it is the absolute truth from your Lord! (It is revealed) in order to warn the nation among whom no warner had come before you. Perhaps they will find their way
32|4|It is Allah Who, in six periods (of time), created the heavens and the earth and everything in between. Then, He mounted the throne! Besides Him, you have no partner or advocate to intercede. So then, will you bear that in mind
32|5|He runs the affairs (of the universe) from the heavens down to earth. Then it, (the detail about all matters) rise up to Him in a day that equals a thousand years based on how you count
32|6|Such is He, the Knower of the unseen and the manifest, absolutely the most Powerful and the Wisest
32|7|It is He Who perfected thoroughly and excellently everything He brought into existence. The creation of man began with clay
32|8|Then He deemed the despised fluid (semen) to be the seed of the human race
32|9|Then He improved and refined, and breathed His spirit into man. After that, He created your ears, your eyes and your heart. Seldom do you offer thanks
32|10|They ask, "(After death), when we disperse and disappear into dust, will we then return in a renewed creation?" What they refuse to believe, in fact, is the meeting with their Lord
32|11|Say, "The angels of death appointed over you, will take full possession of your soul. Then, you will be returned to your Lord
32|12|Alas! If you could see the criminals _ their head bowed (in shame and grief) _ standing before their Lord, saying, "Lord, we have seen and heard. Send us back! Now we will do good deeds. Indeed, we are now convinced
32|13|We would have granted guidance to all living beings (individually), had We so wished! But My word has come to pass, that I will pack the hellfire with the jinn and the human kind together
32|14|Taste (this torment). You forgot the meeting of this day, and so today, We too will forget you! Taste the permanent punishment in return for what you used to do
32|15|In fact, the believers of Our verses are only those who, when reminded of Our verses, fall down prostrate and chant the praises of their Lord. They do not ever show arrogance
32|16|They withdraw from their beds (at night), and stay up praying to their Lord. They spend (in charity) out of what We provide them
32|17|No one knows the delirious delights that are kept hidden, and are meant to be the rewards for the (righteous) deeds they do
32|18|Can the believers be like the evil doers? They are not equal
32|19|Those who believe and do righteous deeds will get the paradise as an abode _ a bountiful treat in return for what they do
32|20|While the fire will be the abode for those who do evil. Any time they attempt to come out of it, they will be shoved right back into it. They will be told, "Taste this torment of the fire! This is what you had refused to believe
32|21|Prior to that greater punishment (in the afterlife), We will also, most certainly, have them taste (many) smaller miseries (in this world). Perhaps they will come back (to their senses)
32|22|Who could be more unjust than the one who ignores the signs of his Lord, even though they are being pointed out to him. We are certainly going to exact a revenge from such criminals
32|23|We had (also) given Musa the book (the Torah). So, do not be in doubt about receiving this Qur´an. We made the book of Musa the guidance for the Israelites
32|24|As long as the Israelites remained patient and believed in Our verses, We raised among them great leaders who guided them in accordance with Our instructions
32|25|Indeed, on the Day of Judgment your Lord will settle between them the issues about which they used to quarrel
32|26|Many towns have We destroyed prior to them. Do they not learn any lesson from that fact? They move about among those ruins. Surely, in that are signs! So why don´t they listen
32|27|Do they not observe? We drive (rain) water towards a barren land. There, with that water We grow crops and forage _ food for their cattle, and for them, too! Don´t they ever reflect
32|28|They ask, "When will that decision come about? (Tell us) if you are truthful
32|29|Say, "Once the day of decision is already here, believing will not do the unbelievers any good. They will not be given a second chance either
32|30|So leave them alone and wait! They, too, are waiting
33|1|Oh prophet! Fear Allah and do not follow the unbelievers and the hypocrites. In fact, it is Allah Who knows everything, and is the Wisest
33|2|Follow the revelation sent to you by your Lord. Indeed, Allah is well Aware of what all of you are doing
33|3|In Allah, place your trust. Allah is sufficient as a trustee
33|4|Allah has not placed two hearts in any person´s body. He does not render your wife to be like your mother simply because you swear and declare her to be like your mother. He does not consider your adopted sons to be like your own begotten sons. These are mere expressions that escape your lips. Allah declares the truth and guides you on to the (right) path
33|5|Call your adopted sons by their (real) fathers´ names. That is more upright according to Allah. Should you not know their fathers, then of course, they are your brothers in faith and your companions. What you utter by mistake will not be held against you, unless you assert it consciously from the bottom of your heart. Allah is the oft Forgiving and the most Merciful
33|6|The prophet has precedence over all believers, more than their own lives. His wives are their mothers. According to the book of Allah, the blood relatives take precedence over other believers and the ´mohajirs´ (believers who abandon their homes for the sake of Allah). But, of course, you may do your friends favors! Such is the writing in the book of decrees
33|7|(Remember)! We have secured covenants from all messengers, including you, Nooh, Ibraheem, Musa and Jesus, the son of Mary. We have obtained from them a solid and solemn pact
33|8|So that He may question the faithful about their truth. He has prepared a painful punishment for the unbelievers
33|9|Oh you who believe! Remember the favors of Allah upon you, when an army had mounted an attack on you? Against them, We sent a severe storm and such armies which you could not see. Allah (watches and) is very well Aware of what you do
33|10|(At that time), the enemy pounced on you from above and below. Your eyes turned white with fright and your hearts came pounding in your throats. You began entertaining doubts of all sorts about Allah
33|11|In that situation the believers were really tested. They were shaken up very severely
33|12|The hypocrites and the ones with the disease (of doubt) in their hearts began saying, "The promises made by Allah and His messenger were just delusions
33|13|A group of them announced, "Oh people of ´Yathrib´ (Medina)! This is not the place to stand the attack. Turn back!" Some of them approached the prophet seeking permission to depart. They said their homes were in danger. Their homes were not in danger. They just wanted to flee
33|14|If the enemy had come upon them from all sides and had tempted them (to defect), they would not have resisted much. They would have betrayed you
33|15|Earlier they had given Allah their word, that they will not turn their backs. Pledges made with Allah must be answered
33|16|Tell them, "You may attempt to run away from death and slaying. But such a flight will not do you much good. After that you will not be able to enjoy except for just a short while
33|17|Say, "Can anyone save you from Allah, if He wants to hurt you? Or (can anyone) prevent Him if He wants to grant you mercy?" Other than Allah, they will not find for themselves a friend or a helper
33|18|Allah surely knows those of you who stay aloof from the prevailing struggle, and say to their brothers, "(do not fight)! Come over to us, let us go!" They hardly participate in the battle themselves
33|19|They are stingy with you. When danger approaches, you see them frightened. They look at you with eyes rolling in their sockets, like a man overcome by the fear of death. However, when the danger abates they return and lash out at you with their sharp (and abrasive) remarks. They are greedy for the bounties (the booties of the battle). Such are those who are not the believers. Therefore, Allah has made their deeds lose all their worth. That is really easy for Allah to do
33|20|They think the (enemy) groups have not yet withdrawn completely. If the troops came back (to attack), they would rather like to be living among the nomadic Bedouins, keeping abreast of the news about you from afar. Even if they happened to be with you, they would hardly join the battle
33|21|Indeed, in the messenger of Allah you have an excellent example for anyone who expects (to meet) Allah and the last day, and remembers Allah a lot
33|22|The true believers saw the enemy troops and said, "This is exactly what Allah and His messengers had told us. Allah and His messenger had spoken the truth!" It rather strengthened their beliefs and heightened their zeal to accept
33|23|Among the believers are men who have made good on their promise with Allah. Some of them have redeemed their pledges (and have been martyred), others await their turn. There has not been any change (in their determination) at all
33|24|(Allah let it happen) so that Allah may reward the faithful for their sincerity and truthfulness; and so that He may either punish the hypocrites, or accept them back in His grace. Indeed, Allah is the oft-Forgiving and the most Merciful
33|25|Allah drove the unbelievers back! In their fury they left without gaining any advantage. On behalf of the believers, Allah sufficed to do battle. Allah is absolutely the Strongest and the most Powerful
33|26|Allah brought the people of the scriptures _ those who were aiding and helping the enemy _ out of their forts. He struck terror in their hearts. That is how you killed some of them and captured others
33|27|Allah had you inhabit their lands, their houses and their riches, and the land that you had never trespassed or trampled. Allah is capable of accomplishing everything
33|28|Oh prophet! Tell your wives, "If you desire the life of this world and its decor, then say so. I will grant you your freedom and provide for you generously
33|29|But if you choose Allah, His messenger and the house of the hereafter, then indeed (you should know that), Allah has prepared a great reward for the righteous amongst you
33|30|Oh wives of the prophet! The punishment will be doubled if anyone of you commits a lewd and vile deed. That is really easy for Allah to do
33|31|(Oh wives of the prophet) We will grant the reward twice to any of you who obeys Allah and His messenger, and acts righteously. We will grant her a generous and eminent sustenance
33|32|Oh wives of the prophet! You are not like other women. If you fear Allah, do not speak in a soft and pleasant voice, lest someone harboring evil desires in his heart entertains evil thoughts. Be straightforward and say the right thing
33|33|Stay put in your homes, and do not display your charms in the manner of the earlier days of ignorance. Establish the ´salat´, pay the ´zakat´ and obey Allah and His messenger. What Allah wants, is to remove all traces of filth from the family of the prophet, and cleanse and purify them really thoroughly
33|34|And remember the verses of Allah, the pearls of wisdom, being recited in your homes. Truly, Allah is the most Elegant and the most Knowledgeable
33|35|Allah has definitely made preparations to grant forgiveness, and to reward generously those men and women who submit (to Allah) and believe, and are obedient, patient and humble. Those who give charity, observe fasts and rigidly guard their chastity. And (above all) those men and women who remember Allah abundantly
33|36|It is inappropriate and unbecoming of a believer _ man or woman _ to expect a choice in any matter which has already been decided and settled by Allah and His messenger. Anyone who disbelieves Allah and His messenger is clearly misguided; he has strayed far away
33|37|And recall that man (Zayd)? Allah had done favors upon him, and you had too. You were saying to him, "Fear Allah, keep your wife and do not divorce her." Allah was going to bring out into the open that which you kept hidden in your heart at that time. You were afraid of people, although that is Allah´s right! You should fear Him only! When Zayd had completed his object (of divorcing his wife), We married her to you. (We did that) so the believers may have no restriction in (and may have no stigma attached to) marrying the former wives of their adopted sons, provided the adopted sons had already divorced their wives. The commands of Allah must be fulfilled
33|38|No restriction stands in the way of the prophet. Nothing restrains him from carrying out the orders of Allah. This happens to be the established practice of Allah in the case of all the messengers who had gone by earlier. And Allah´s command is destiny, irrevocable and predominant
33|39|(This is true for) those who carry the message of Allah, fear Him and are not afraid of anyone except Allah. Allah is sufficient to hold the reckoning
33|40|Muhammad (SAW), is not the father of any man among you, but he is the messenger of Allah and the last of the prophets. Allah is very well Aware of all things
33|41|Oh you who believe! Remember Allah! Remember Him often
33|42|Glorify and chant His praises every morning and afternoon
33|43|It is He Who bestows His blessings upon you. His angels pray for you, that He may bring you out of darkness into light. He is very Kind and Benevolent towards the believers
33|44|Peace" will be their greeting on the day they meet Him. He has prepared a generous reward for them
33|45|Oh prophet! We have sent you as a witness, as a bearer of good news and as a warner
33|46|And as the one inviting towards the path of Allah by His will, and as a guiding illuminating lamp
33|47|Announce the good news to the believers. They will receive a great abundance of favors and gifts from Allah
33|48|Do not yield to the unbelievers and the hypocrites. Disregard the nuisance caused by them, and in Allah place your trust. Allah is sufficient as a trustee
33|49|Oh you who believe! If you divorce a believing woman _ without having consummated the marriage with her _ you cannot place upon her the requirement of "Iddat" (waiting period of 120 days before re-marrying). So grant her the freedom and provide for her generously
33|50|Oh prophet! We have made your wives lawful for you _ provided their agreed nuptial-dower has been paid _ and the slave women Allah has granted you. (Other women lawful for you to marry are): the daughters of your paternal uncles and aunts and the daughters of your maternal uncles and aunts _ those of them who migrated with you (from Makkah)_ and the believing woman who wants to enter the prophet´s household as his wife and he wants to espouse her. This (more than four wives) is an exemption especially for you, not for any other believer. We know what We have mandated for the believers concerning their wives, and the captive women. You are exempted so as to remove the difficulty you face! (The difficulty: the taboo, the culturally imposed restriction against marrying the former wives of the adopted sons, had to be broken by an actual example. It had to be done without divorcing any of the existing wives. The solution: suspend the limit of four wives for the prophet). Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful. NB: Another taboo broken by this divinely ordained marriage was the restriction against cousin marriages. The woman was the prophet´s first cousin
33|51|You are being given the right! You may live apart from, or take up residence with whichever wife you want. And you may get back together with any of your wives you had previously estranged. You are not to be blamed. This is more likely to keep them happy, free from grief and contented with what you give them. Allah knows whatever exists in the hearts of all of you. Allah is all-Knowing, and He is the most Gentle
33|52|After this (right) other women are not lawful for you, except the captive women. You may not bring other wives _ even though their beauty may charm you _ in place of the ones you already have. Allah watches over all things vigilantly
33|53|Oh you who believe! Do not enter the prophet´s home, especially at mealtime, unless you have been granted permission. If you are invited to dine at the prophet´s home, arrive on time (not too early) and disperse after you have finished eating. Do not overstay and linger on in conversation. That bothers the prophet, and he is too embarrassed to tell you. But Allah is not ashamed of telling the truth! When you have to ask the wives of the prophet about anything, do so from across a screen. That is more upright, and it keeps your and their hearts more unadultrated. It is not right for you to aggravate the prophet, and it is improper for you to ever marry any of his wives after his death. Indeed that, according to Allah, is a serious offence
33|54|Allah is Aware of every single thing, regardless of whether you express it or keep it undisclosed
33|55|It is not improper for the ladies (and will not be held against them), if they converse freely with their fathers, their sons, their brothers and their sons, their sisters´ sons and other women _ including the slave women. Oh women! Fear Allah! Indeed, Allah observes every single thing
33|56|Indeed Allah and His angels send their blessings upon the prophet. Oh you who believe! Send your salutes and your sincere greetings upon him
33|57|Certainly, those who annoy Allah and the prophet (should beware); Allah has placed a curse on them in this life and in the afterlife. He has prepared for them a humialiating punishment
33|58|Those who distress the believing men and women (by levelling false charges against them) without any reason bear the burden of having slandered a believer _ a glaring sin
33|59|Oh prophet! Ask your wives and daughters and the women of the believers to wrap a loose outer garment completely around their bodies (leaving the face and the figure unobservable). That way they are more likely to be recognised and won´t be harassed. Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
33|60|The hypocrites and those with a disease (of doubt) in their hearts must quit spreading false rumors in the town (Medina). Otherwise, We will most certainly rouse you into action against them. Then they will not remain your neighbors in this town much longer
33|61|Cursed are they! Wherever found, they will be captured and killed in a carnage
33|62|Allah has enforced this course of action for all of those gone by earlier. You will never find any departure in the established practice of Allah
33|63|People ask you about (the exact time and date of) the hour (of Judgment). Say, "In fact, the knowledge about that is with Allah (alone). You do not realize! That hour might just have drawn very close
33|64|Indeed, Allah has cursed the unbelievers. He has prepared for them a blazing fire
33|65|In it, they will live for ever. There, they will not find a friend or a helper
33|66|That day, their faces will be roasted on (an open) fire; they will say, "Alas, if only we had obeyed Allah, and had obeyed His messenger
33|67|They will (further) say, "Our Lord, we really obeyed our leaders, the influential and the distinguished among us. But they misled us and made us lose the way
33|68|Our Lord, inflict upon them twice the punishment, and place upon them a mighty curse
33|69|Oh you, the believers! Do not be like those who harassed Musa. Allah cleared him of what they alleged. According to Allah, he was a distinguished messenger
33|70|Oh those of you who believe! (Always) say the right thing
33|71|He will rectify and correct your deeds, and He will forgive your sins. Those who obey Allah and His messenger have indeed achieved the greatest success
33|72|Indeed, We presented this trust (the Qur´an) to the sky, the earth and the mountains, to see if they would accept the responsibility that goes with it. They shied away and declined to bear it. But man assumed the obligation. Man was indeed cruel (to himself) and ignorant (of its importance)
33|73|(Having accepted, man is liable and) Allah will punish the hypocrite men and women, and the polytheist men and women. He will forgive the believing men and women. Allah happens to be the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
34|1|All praise is for Allah! To Him belongs everything in the heavens and on the earth. In the hereafter, too, all praise belongs to Him. He is the Wisest and the most Aware
34|2|He knows everything that sinks into the earth, and everything that emerges from it, that which descends from the sky, and that which ascends into it. He is the most Merciful and the most Forgiving
34|3|The unbelievers say, "(We have rejected it flat out, yet the punishment of) the hour (of Judgment) does not strike us." Say, "Of course it will! It will most certainly come upon you. I swear by my Lord Who knows the unseen intimately." Nothing worth even a (single) grain of sand in the heavens or on earth _ nor anything smaller or larger than that _ ever escapes His attention. Everything is (recorded) in a clear register
34|4|(That hour will come) so that He may reward the believers _ those who perform the righteous deeds. Such are the ones, for whom there is forgiveness and a plentiful provision
34|5|And there are those who strive to refute and repudiate Our signs. Such are the ones, for whom there exists a severely painful punishment
34|6|Those given the knowledge understand that the revelation sent to you by your Lord is the truth. It leads on to the path of the Almighty, the most Praise worthy
34|7|The unbelievers (ridicule and) say, "May we show you a man who claims that after you (die and) disintegrate thoroughly into dust, you will be raised in a renewed existence
34|8|He either lies about Allah or suffers from psychosis." Indeed not! Rather, those who deny the afterlife are (themselves) in a torment. They have strayed far away
34|9|Do they not look at the sky and the earth in front of and behind them? If We want We can make the earth cave in on them, or We can drop a piece of the sky (an asteroid?) upon them. In that, is surely a sign for every repentant believer
34|10|Indeed, We had awarded Da´ood precedence (a special gift) from Me. "Oh you Mountains, act in harmony with him!" (We said the same to) the birds. We made the steel malleable for him
34|11|(We instructed him), "Make the coat of armor from the steel, and fix its links (solidly). Perform the righteous deeds! Indeed, I observe everything you do
34|12|And to Sulaiman (We granted control over) the wind. (Harnessing that control) he could cover the distance of a month´s journey during the run of the wind in just one morning; and come back during the course of the wind in the evening. We caused a stream of copper to gush forth for him. By the will of Allah, the jinn worked under his supervision. Whenever a jinn ignored the command and turned away from his job, We made that jinn taste the torment of the blazing fire
34|13|The jinn worked for him and did whatever he wanted them to do. They built towering buildings (to house homeless people), carved images and icons (on the buildings), constructed large basins as reservoirs (to store water), and built huge immovable cooking pots (to feed people). Offer thanks, oh you the descendants of Da´ood! Very few of My servants express gratitude
34|14|When We sent death upon Sulaiman, nothing could tell the jinn about his demise except the little termites gnawing away at his staff (which supported his corpse). Finally, when (the staff crumbled, and) his body fell down, the jinn came to know that they had no knowledge of the future. Else, they would not have stayed in that humiliating torment
34|15|For the residents of ´Saba´ there was surely a proof in their (very) houses. Each house had two gardens: the one on the right and the other on the left. (We said), "Eat the food provided by your Lord, and thank Him! (Your) land is fertile and (your) Lord is Forgiving
34|16|But they turned away. So We (broke the dam and) flooded their land with the dam water. We converted their gardens into uncultivated plots (growing wild trees) with bitter fruits and a few scattered trees of Tamarisk and Lotus
34|17|In this manner, We punished them for their ingratitude (and their disbelief). Do We not inflict such punishment only upon the ungrateful ones
34|18|Along the highway connecting their towns and the town We blessed (Jerusalem), We raised many prominent communities, each not far from the other. (We said), "Travel in the land in complete safety during the day and the night
34|19|But they said, "Oh our Lord, lengthen our traveling distance between our towns. They subjected themselves to unjust practices (i.e. adopted means to reverse population growth). Therefore, We turned them into tales (of people long gone). We completely disintegrated (their empire) and scattered them all around. In that, is surely a sign for every steadfast and grateful person
34|20|In their case, ´Iblees´ certainly found his assumptions to be correct. They all followed him _ except a (small) band of believers
34|21|He did not have any control (or authority) over them. (We let ´Iblees´ tempt people) so We may distinguish the one who believes in the afterlife from the one who remained in doubt about its existence. Your Lord is Watchful over every single thing
34|22|Say, "Call all those you have set up as gods besides Allah. They neither own, nor share the ownership of even an atom´s worth of anything in the heavens or the earth. Nor are any of them associates of Allah
34|23|Mediation with Allah will benefit only those for whom He (graciously) permits mediation. When their panic eases, they will ask their mediator, "What did your Lord say?" The mediators will answer, "The just verdict! He is the most Eminent, the Greatest
34|24|Say, "Who sends you provisions from the heavens and the earth?" (And if they fail to answer) say, "Allah! And only one of us is upon the true guidance. The other has clearly gone astray
34|25|Say, "You will not be asked about the wrongs we commit and we will not be held responsible for what you do
34|26|Say, "(On the Day of Judgment) our Lord will bring us together. Then He will settle all matters between us fairly and equitably. He is the all-Knowing Judge
34|27|Say, "Let me look at those you have installed as His partners. Not at all! Indeed, Allah (by His own right) is the most Powerful and the Wisest
34|28|(Oh messenger) We have, in fact, appointed you as the bearer of good news, and as a warner for the entire humanity. But most people do not comprehend
34|29|They just keep saying, "When will that promise come about, if you are telling the truth
34|30|Say, "You have an appointment (with Allah) on that Day. You cannot hasten it, nor put it off _ not even for an hour
34|31|The unbelievers said, "We will never believe in this Qur´an, nor in the scriptures that came before it." (Oh Prophet), if only you could see such cruel and unjust ones standing in front of their Lord! They will hurl charges against each other. The weak and the meek will accuse those who are arrogant. "Had it not been for you, we would be the believers
34|32|In response, the arrogant ones will say to the weak, "Did we hold you back from the guidance, after it had come to you? In fact, you really were guilty yourselves
34|33|The weak will retaliate and say to the arrogant, "No, but you played your tricks day and night. You asked us to reject Allah and appoint others as His equal." Both of them will try to conceal their remorse when they see the punishment right in front of them. We will place shackles on the necks of the unbelievers. They would be dealt with precisely in accordance with what their actions deserve
34|34|Whenever We appointed a warner to a town, its affluent class said, "We reject the message you have brought
34|35|They said, "We are wealthier and have more offspring than you. We are not going to face punishment
34|36|Say, "Of course my Lord expands _ or restricts _ His provisions for whomever He wants. But most people do not understand
34|37|It is not your wealth or your children that confers upon you a status of honor with Us. Rather, those who believe and perform good deeds are closer to Allah. They shall have twice the reward for their deeds and they shall live in peace in the lofty mansions (of paradise)
34|38|While those who strive to put down Our signs will be brought to face the (ultimate) torment
34|39|Say, "My Lord expands the provisions _ or restricts them _ for any of His servants He pleases. It is He Who compensates and replaces whatever you spend (or consume). He is absolutely the very Best of Providers
34|40|On the day He brings them all together (in His presence), He will say to the angels, "Was it really you they used to worship
34|41|They will say, "Exalted are You! You are our Patron and not they." In fact, they used to worship the jinn (i.e. the devil and not Us). Most of them believed (and followed) the jinn
34|42|Today, none of you will have any power to benefit _ or harm _ anyone else." To those who were unjust, We shall say, "Here, taste the torment by fire. This is what you used to refuse to believe
34|43|When Our clear lucid verses (of the Qur´an) are recited, they say, "He is just a man; he wants to distract you away from worshipping what your forefathers used to worship." They say, "This is nothing but fantasy, a lie!" When the (absolute) truth came to them, the unbelievers responded to it by saying, "This is evidently nothing but magic
34|44|Although, prior to you We did not give them a book they could study, nor did We send a warner towards them
34|45|Those (earlier nations) long gone had also disbelieved. The present unbelievers do not possess even a tenth of (the strength, stability and the riches of) what We had given to the earlier nations. But they rejected My messengers. So, (observe) how (devastating) was My disapproval
34|46|Say, "I have this piece of advice for you. For the sake of Allah, give it some thought. Ponder (calmly) about this matter _ alone or with someone. There is no insanity afflicting your friend, (the messenger). In fact, he is only a warner who alerts you of a severe torment ahead of time
34|47|Say, "If I ever claimed a reward for myself, you may have it! My reward, in fact, is with Allah! He is the Witness over all things
34|48|Say, "Indeed my Lord rams the Truth (against falsehood). He knows everything there is to know about the unseen
34|49|Say, "The truth has arrived. So the falsehood has absolutely nothing to declare or display
34|50|Say, "If I err, I alone would bear its consequences. But if I am on the right path, it is because my Lord sends me the revelation. Indeed, He hears all, and He is really close at hand
34|51|Alas, if you could only see! Stricken with panic, they will find no escape. They would be nabbed from a nearby place
34|52|They will say, "We do believe it (now)!" How can they bring back (the chance for) salvation. The matter has gone too far out of hand
34|53|Earlier on, (when they were alive) they had rejected it. They used to suppose and surmise about the unseen. (They relied on human perceptions); they were so far away
34|54|They shall be barred from (receiving) what they like and eagerly desire _ exactly as their kind before them. They lived their lives lost in doubt and disbelief
35|1|All praise is for Allah, the Creator of the heavens and the earth, the One Who appointed angels _ with two, three or four pairs of wings _ as His messengers. He adds to the creation as He pleases. Allah is indeed capable of doing everything
35|2|No one can hold back whatever Allah grants mankind by His grace; and what Allah withholds, no one can release. He is the most Powerful and the Wisest
35|3|Oh you people! Do not forget the favors of Allah upon you. Is there any creator other than Allah Who feeds you (and provides for all your needs) from the heaven and the earth? There is no god but He! Why then, are you being deceived
35|4|(Oh prophet)! If they accuse you of lying, (remember), messengers before you had also been accused of lying. All matters are referred to Allah (for decisions)
35|5|Oh all you people, listen! Of course the promise of Allah is absolutely true! So do not ever let the life of this world deceive you, and do not ever let the deceiver, (the Shaitan), mislead you about Allah
35|6|Shaitan is really your enemy! So treat him as your enemy! He invites you to join his group, so you may end up being his companion in the hellfire
35|7|There is a severely harsh punishment for those who disbelieve! For those who believe and do good deeds, there is forgiveness and a great reward
35|8|How about the one whose bad deeds are made to appear adorable to him, so he considers them good? Allah throws on the wrong path whomever He wants, and He guides whom He wants. So do not feel sorry for them, and do not grieve. Allah is well Aware of what they do
35|9|It is Allah Who sends the winds, then stirs the clouds into action and drives them towards the dead and barren land. Thus, after its death, We bring the land back to life! Your return to life (after your death) shall also happen in the same manner
35|10|The one who covets (and strives for) honor and glory (should know that) the honor and might belong entirely to Allah. The worthy word of prayer ascends up to reach Him. The righteous deeds make it rise. A severe torment awaits those who devise treacherous schemes (to misguide people). The schemes of such people will come to naught
35|11|Allah created you from dust and then from a drop of semen. Then, He fashioned you into one of two sexes _ male and female. No female ever conceives or delivers except with His precise knowledge. The aged man lives that long while the lives of others are curtailed strictly in compliance with His commands prescribed in a book. That is really easy for Allah
35|12|The two kinds of flowing water (on the earth) are not alike. One is sweet, refreshing and quenches the thirst. The other is bitter and brackish. Yet, from both of them you attain fresh meat to eat, and extract pearls to wear. You see huge ships plough through the waves so you may seek His blessings (and earn your livelihood). Perhaps you will feel grateful
35|13|He wraps the night over the day and He rolls out the day over the night. He has tamed the sun and the moon _ each will stay in motion for a specified period. Such is Allah, your Lord. The empire (of this entire universe) belongs to Him. Those others you call gods beside Him do not own even a flimsy film over a date-stone
35|14|If you address your prayers to those you call gods (besides Allah), they will not hear you. They could not grant your prayers even if they heard you. On the Day of Judgment they will disown your acts of associating them with Allah. (Oh prophet)! None but the One most Aware could tell you all this
35|15|Oh you people! You are direly in need of Allah (to exist and subsist), whereas Allah is Free of all wants and is Worthy of all praise
35|16|If He wants, He could eliminate you completely. He could replace you with an entirely new form of life
35|17|This is not difficult for Allah at all
35|18|(In the afterlife), no one will bear the burden of somebody else´s (sins). The one heavily loaded (with sins) may ask others _ even his own closest relatives _ to help carry some of his load, but no one will assume even a tiny bit of his burden. In fact, (oh prophet), you can alert (only) those who fear their Lord and establish ´salat´ without having seen Him. Whoever strives to purify his soul, does so for his own good. Towards Allah is (your final) destination
35|19|The blind and those endowed with sight are not equal
35|20|Nor are the darkness and the light
35|21|Nor the (cool) shade and (the sultry heat of) the sun
35|22|The dead and the living are not equal. Of course Allah can make anyone He wants hear (anything He wants). But, you cannot make people lying in their graves hear anything
35|23|You are only a warner
35|24|Indeed, We have sent you with the absolute truth as a bearer of good news and as a warner. Every community that ever existed had its warner
35|25|If they reject you (remember), they had also rejected those before you, (even though) the messengers brought them clear proofs, scriptures and the (revealing) illuminating book
35|26|Finally, I nabbed the unbelievers; and (observe) how (devastating) was My punishment
35|27|Do you not see? Allah sends water down from the sky, and with it We produce fruits of various kinds and diverse colors. Even the hills display streaks of varying colors: shades of white, red and jet black
35|28|Similarly men, beasts, crawling creatures and cattle are of different colors, too. Indeed, among His servants, those with knowledge are the ones who really fear Allah. Of course! Allah is the Mightiest and the most Forgiving
35|29|There are those who recite the book of Allah, perform ´salat´ and (for the sake of Allah) spend _ secretly as well as openly _ out of the wealth We have given them. They do so because they expect a bargain with no risk of loss
35|30|So that Allah may grant them their reward in full, and by His grace grant them even more (than their deeds deserve). Indeed, He is the most Forgiving. And He appreciates (and rewards) gratitude
35|31|(Oh prophet)! The book We have revealed to you is the absolute truth. It reaffirms (the truth revealed in) the earlier scriptures. Allah is certainly well informed about His servants. He watches over them
35|32|Then, We chose others among Our servants and had them inherit the (last) book. Some among them are unjust to themselves (and refuse to accept this inheritance _ the Qur´an), and some are lukewarm in their acceptance. Others, by the grace of Allah rush towards it and excel in performing the righteous acts. That is indeed a great honor
35|33|They will be ushered into an eternal (and idyllic) paradise where they will be offered gold bracelets and pearls to wear. Their clothes, there, would be made of (fine) silk
35|34|And they will say, "All praise is for Allah Who cleared away all our afflictions (and shortcomings). Our Lord is certainly the most Forgiving. He is ready to appreciate and reward gratitude (profusely)
35|35|The One Who has given us, by His grace, this house of eternity to live. Here, we do not have to toil and struggle! Here, we do not undergo any fatigue
35|36|There is hellfire for those who disbelieve. It will not finish them off completely. They will not die. But the torture will not be reduced (or eased). This is how We punish every (disbelieving and) ungrateful person
35|37|There, they will cry out for help (and say), "Our Lord, (please)) take us out of here. This time around, we will perform righteous deeds, quite different from what we did earlier!" (They shall receive the answer), "Did We not give you a life long enough for you to listen to (and heed) the advice, if you really wanted. A warner had come to you! Now, taste (the torment)! There is no helper for the unjust (and the cruel)
35|38|Allah is the One Who knows all the unseen mysteries of the heavens and the earth. Indeed, He even knows that which lies hidden in the hearts (of all beings)
35|39|Certainly, it is He Who appointed man as His deputy on earth. Thus the burden of disbelief lies solely and squarely upon those who reject. The rejection of the disbelievers only makes them ever more loathsome according to Allah. The rejection of the unbelievers, therefore, does nothing more than multiply their own loss
35|40|Say, "What do you think about the partners you call upon and pray to other than Allah? Show me what they have created on this earth! Or do you think they have any share in the heaven?" Have We given them a book they can cite in support of their views? Not so at all! In fact what the evildoers assure each other are mere delusions
35|41|Indeed it is Allah Who holds the heavens and the earth (under control), and keeps them from falling into disarray. There is no one except He, Who can hold them together, should they break loose and deviate. Of course, He is the most Forbearing, the most Forgiving
35|42|They used to swear by Allah! They used to assert solemnly that if a warner came to them they would accept his guidance and would be better than any other nation ever. But the arrival of the warner merely increased their aversion for the truth
35|43|They behaved haughtily in the land and devised evil plans (against Our messenger). But inevitably, the treacherous tricks boomerang and engulf the schemers. So are they waiting for the same fate that became the lot of the earlier disbelievers? They shall not find any change in Our established practice. They shall certainly not find any power capable of (intervening and) altering Our (chosen) practice
35|44|Have they not traveled around in this world? Have they not witnessed the fateful end of those who lived earlier _ those who were much stronger (physically)? Absolutely nothing in the heavens or on the earth can render Allah helpless! Indeed, He knows everything and is Capable of doing anything
35|45|Were Allah to punish people over every misdeed they commit, He would not have left any being alive on the surface of the earth. Instead, He prefers to postpone and grant them a respite until a specified time. Then, when the time comes, (beware)! Allah is surely Watchful over His servants
36|1|Ya seen
36|2|By the wisdom filled Qur´an
36|3|Indeed, you are one of the messengers
36|4|Upon the straight path
36|5|This (Qur´an) is the revelation from the Mightiest, the most Merciful
36|6|So that you may warn the people whose fore-fathers were not warned. Hence they live in ignorance
36|7|Against most of them, the sentence is surely justified. They do not believe
36|8|Verily, We have placed shackles around their necks that come clear up to their chins; so their heads stick out
36|9|And We have placed a barrier in front of them, and a barrier behind them. We have also covered them over. So they see nothing
36|10|It makes no difference to them! Warn them or not, they shall not believe
36|11|In fact, you can only warn the one who listens to the advice and fears Rehman without having seen Him. To such a person, give the glad tidings of forgiveness and a generous reward
36|12|Of course, it is We Who grants life back to the dead. We are recording all the deeds they send ahead, as well as all the traces they leave behind! We have preserved an account of all things in a clear and well-protected register
36|13|Cite the example of the town, its people and the messengers who came there
36|14|We sent two messengers towards them. They denied both of them! Then, We reinforced them with a third and they said, "We have been appointed messengers towards you
36|15|They replied, "You are merely humans like us. Rehman has sent down nothing! You are just making it up
36|16|They said, "Our Lord knows! We really are messengers towards you
36|17|Our responsibility is nothing more than to convey the message in clear explicit terms
36|18|They said, "We have really been jinxed by your presence. If you do not desist, we will surely stone you to death! You will receive a grievous torture from us
36|19|The messengers responded, "Is it because you are being fore-warned? You are your own jinx. In fact, you are a nation guilty of excess
36|20|A man came running from the outskirts of the town and said, "Oh my people! Follow the messengers
36|21|Follow them! They are not asking anything in return. And they are well-guided
36|22|Why not? Why should I not worship the One Who caused me to be? And towards Whom you all must return
36|23|Shall I accept other gods besides Him? Should Rehman decide to harm me, these (false gods) could not rescue me, nor could they intervene to help a bit
36|24|Clearly, I would then be tremendously at a disadvantage
36|25|I have come to believe in your Lord! So listen
36|26|(After they stoned him to death), he was told to enter paradise! The man said, "Alas! If only my people knew
36|27|My lord forgave me and included me among the honorable! And in return for what
36|28|Thereafter, We did not send an army from heavens upon his people; We did not have to
36|29|There was just a single bang, and they all were left lifeless! (As if extinguished)
36|30|What a pity! These human kinds! Their only response to the messengers _ whenever they came to them _ was to mock and make fun of them
36|31|Do they not observe? Many a town have We demolished prior to them. Verily, none of their dwellers ever return
36|32|Surely! All of them together would be presented before Us (for judgment)
36|33|And the proof for them (of the lie-to-come) is the dead land __ barren and desolate. We cause it to spring back to life! And We bring forth the grain out of it, which they eat
36|34|We dotted the land with orchards of grapes and dates, and We caused springs to gush out of the earth
36|35|That they may eat its produce! It was not they who made it all happen! So, should they not be grateful
36|36|Exalted is He Who created all things in pairs! Things that grow in fields. Things within their own selves. Even things they have no knowledge of
36|37|Another proof is the night! When We strip the day off it, they are left in the dark
36|38|The sun proceeds towards its marked destination. This is the destiny appointed by the Mightiest and the most Knowledgeable
36|39|And the moon! We destined it to return in stages until it comes back like the dried out branch of the date tree
36|40|It is not ordained for the sun to overtake the moon, nor for the night to outpace the day. Each, (the sun and the moon), is afloat in its respective orbit
36|41|Another proof for them! We surely boarded their descendants on a laden ark
36|42|And We created other similar vessels for them to sail upon
36|43|If We wish We could drown them, and no one would hear their whimper of protest! Nor would they be rescued
36|44|Except (their respite is) by Our grace, and only as merriment for a brief while
36|45|(They ignore) when they are told to beware of what lies before them and what lies ahead of them, so that they may receive mercy
36|46|They merely turn away and ignore each and every proof of their Lord that ever reaches them
36|47|When asked to spend that which Allah has granted them, those who disbelieve say to those who believe, "Shall we feed those whom Allah could have fed, had He wished? You are clearly in the wrong
36|48|And they say, "If you are truthful, tell us! When will that promise _ (the hereafter)_ be fulfilled
36|49|What they await is nothing but a single bang! They will still be busy quarreling when it will seize them in its grip
36|50|Then, they will have no chance either to make a will or to return to their families
36|51|Then the trumpet will sound. Instantly, they will leap out of their graves and begin marching towards their Lord
36|52|They shall say, "Oh misery to us! Who has aroused us out of our graves?" ........ "This is that promise! Rehman´s promise! The messengers had been truthful after all
36|53|There will just be a single bang, and suddenly, all of them together shall be arraigned before Us
36|54|That day, no being will be wronged a bit! And all of you will be repaid strictly in accordance with what you used to do
36|55|And surely, that day, those in paradise will be busy enjoying the fruits
36|56|They and their spouses will be under the cool dense shades! Seated on couches and reclining on pillows
36|57|Theirs shall be all the fruits! And anything else their hearts desire
36|58|Peace!" Their Merciful Lord shall greet them
36|59|And you, Oh criminals, stand aside! Distinct and separate, today
36|60|Oh children of Adam! Did I not have a pact with you, that you will not worship Shaitan? He is your professed enemy
36|61|And that rather, you will worship Me. That is the straight path
36|62|He (Shaitan) has indeed, taken a severe toll, and has led astray a great many of you! So, do you not ever think
36|63|This, here, is the hellfire you had been promised
36|64|Go, roast in it today! Just deserts for your denial
36|65|Today, We have sealed your lips! Your hands will speak to Us, and your feet will bear witness to all you used to do
36|66|Should We so decide, We could wipe the eyes off their faces! Will they, then, not keep groping for their path? And from where might they obtain their sight
36|67|If We want, We could squash them in their very places! Then they could neither proceed nor return
36|68|We do reverse the very nature of those to whom We give a long life! Don´t they ever think
36|69|We did not teach him (Muhammad SAW) poetry. That is beneath him! What it is (the Qur´an), is a reminder and an illuminating open book
36|70|In order that, those who are still alive may be forewarned by it! And the charge against the disbelievers may ring true
36|71|Have they not observed? We created the cattle for them! Our handiwork! Now, they own these cattle
36|72|We have tamed these cattle for them. Some they ride, others they eat
36|73|They drink their milk and derive other benefits from them! Should they not be grateful
36|74|They took gods besides Allah, so that, perhaps they may receive some help
36|75|They (false gods) will not be able to lend any help; for they would themselves be brought out (before Us, to be condemned) as their allies
36|76|Let their remarks not cause you grief. We, surely know every thing they say, that which they utter in secret, as well as that which they declare openly
36|77|Does man not know!? We created him from a speck of fluid! And now, he stands defiantly before Us __argumentative and boisterous
36|78|Hurls insults at Us, and forgets his own origin, and says, "Who will bring these bones back to life when they have withered away
36|79|Say! The One Who created them in the first place will bring them back to life. He is Well-versed in all means and manners of creation
36|80|He lets the green trees produce fire for you. So now, with it you kindle the flame
36|81|Could the Creator of the heavens and the earth not be capable of creating the likes of them? Most definitely! He is All-knowing, and the Greatest, most Versatile Creator
36|82|He has commanded it so; whenever He intends anything to be, He says to it ´Be!´ and it becomes
36|83|Exalted is He, in Whose hands is the destiny of all things and towards Whom you all must return
37|1|(Allah swears by the angels), those who stand in rows, awaiting orders, keeping ranks
37|2|They restrain (and rebuke the unbelievers) constantly
37|3|And carry and convey the word _ (the inspiration and revelation from Allah)
37|4|(Allah proclaims that) certainly, your God is the Absolute One
37|5|The Lord of the heavens and the earth and everything in between, the Lord of each and every point of sunrise (the Lord of the Easts)
37|6|Indeed, We brightened the heaven (the sky) of this world with beautiful stars
37|7|Then screened and shielded it against every defiant Shaitan
37|8|These Shaitans are chased out of everywhere as they attempt to eavesdrop on the conversation of the exalted angels (to learn about the events to come)
37|9|These Shaitans are outcasts. Theirs is the perpetual punishment
37|10|If one (of the Shaitans) succeeds in snatching away a fragment (of knowledge), a piercing flame follows him (in hot pursuit)
37|11|Just ask their (the disbelievers´) opinion. What is harder to create? They, or the other things We have created? We created them from sticky clay
37|12|In fact, (Oh prophet)! you are struck with awe, while they just mock
37|13|And when advised, they do not heed
37|14|When shown the sign, they scoff and laugh it off
37|15|And respond, "This is evidently just magic
37|16|Is it possible? Once we die and wither away into dust and bones, would we really be brought back to life
37|17|And our forefathers, too
37|18|Say, "Yes! Of course you (all) would! You would be humbled
37|19|In fact, it will take just a single hoot (and rebuke), and at once they shall (wake up and) stare
37|20|They will say, "Oh misery to us, this is the Day of Judgment
37|21|(They will hear the reply), "This is the day of the verdict you used to reject
37|22|(Allah will order the angels): Gather together all the evildoers, their wives and also those (deities) they used to worship
37|23|Instead of Allah! Then, shove them along the path towards the blazing fire
37|24|But detain them for a while! First, they must answer
37|25|What is wrong with you? Why are you not helping each other out, (today)
37|26|In fact, that day they shall (concede and) give in so sheepishly
37|27|Right then, they will confront and accuse each other
37|28|Some will say to others, "You (swore and) came to us (feigning sincerity); you had (an imposing) status over us
37|29|Others will reply, "Not so at all! You were disbelievers yourselves
37|30|We had no control over you. You were certainly a defiant people
37|31|So (now), in our case the prediction of our Lord has come to pass. We (both of us) shall have to taste (the torment)
37|32|We led you astray, but we too, were (lost and) on the wrong path
37|33|On that day, they shall all share that torment together
37|34|This is really the way We shall deal with the criminals
37|35|They used to scorn and scoff arrogantly when told that there is no god except Allah
37|36|They said, "Should we give up our gods for the sake of an obsessed poet
37|37|On the contrary, he brought them the absolute truth; it confirmed the (teachings of the previous) messengers
37|38|(You did not accept), so you definitely have to taste the painful punishment
37|39|You will be punished strictly in accordance with what you had done
37|40|But the sincere and obedient servants of Allah (will be safe)
37|41|The known rewards (and riches) will be theirs
37|42|Fruits (of all kinds)! They will be the honored (residents)
37|43|In the blessings filled paradise
37|44|Seated on elevated thrones, facing each other
37|45|Cups filled with drinks from the fountains (of paradise) will be passed around among them
37|46|White (wine)! A delicious and delectable drink
37|47|It will neither inebriate; nor cause a hangover
37|48|(They will be) accompanied by chaste and demure females, with eyes only for their mates
37|49|So dainty and delicate; like a thin film lining the eggshell
37|50|(Surrounded by such luxuries) they will face each other and converse
37|51|One of them would say to others, "I had a friend
37|52|He used to say (to me): are you also one of those who believe
37|53|That we would be asked to face the reckoning even after we turn into dust and bones
37|54|He would be asked, "Would you look at him now
37|55|He would look and spot his ex-friend in the thick of the blazing fire
37|56|He would call out (to his ex friend in the hellfire), "I swear by Allah, you had all but ruined me
37|57|Had it not been for my Lord´s blessings, I would be there (burning in the hellfire) with you, right now
37|58|(Happily, he would muse), "Are we never going to die now
37|59|Was our death in our previous life final? Are we never going to be punished
37|60|That, indeed, is a tremendous triumph
37|61|Those desirous (of success) should strive for just such an outcome
37|62|Isn´t a gracious feast (in paradise) better than the tree of ´zaqum´
37|63|We have deemed that tree to be a test for the evildoers
37|64|That tree springs forth from the very bottom of hell
37|65|Its buds (and crop) resemble the heads of Shaitans
37|66|The evil doers will have (nothing but) that to eat. They will stuff their stomachs with it
37|67|They will get (only) boiling water (to gulp down the ´zaqum´)
37|68|After (such a meal) they will come right back to the blazing fire of hell
37|69|(Their crime): they found their parents astray
37|70|Yet (without thinking) they rushed along in their (parents´) footsteps
37|71|(Even though they knew that) the earlier people (blundered and) had gone astray
37|72|We certainly raised messengers among them to warn them
37|73|So look at how those people forewarned met their end. The fate that they fared
37|74|But the sincere and the obedient servants of Allah (will be safe)
37|75|Earlier, Nooh called Us and We responded. We are simply the Best of those who respond
37|76|We rescued him and his household from an awful torture
37|77|We arranged it so that only his progeny survived (the flood)
37|78|And among the generations to follow, We let his name be honored and revered
37|79|Peace (and honor) is for ´Nooh´ in the entire universe
37|80|This is really how We reward the righteous ones
37|81|Indeed, he was one of Our (obedient and) believing servants
37|82|We drowned the others _ all the rest of them
37|83|Among those who followed him and his ways, was Ibraheem
37|84|He brought back to his Lord an untainted (and unblemished) heart, free from evil
37|85|He said to his father and his people, "What do you worship? (These idols)
37|86|Do you prefer lies? Do you seek false gods instead of Allah
37|87|Is this your notion of the Lord of the universe
37|88|Then he (rolled his eyes and) cast a sweeping glance at the stars
37|89|And said, "I really feel sick
37|90|So they turned their backs and left him alone
37|91|Stealthily, he approached their gods and said, "Why do you not eat (the offerings)
37|92|What is wrong? You don´t even talk
37|93|And then he attacked them, striking sharp blows with his right hand
37|94|The worshippers came rushing towards him
37|95|He asked, "You worship these idols? You have carved them yourself (they are your handiwork)
37|96|While you _ as also your handiwork _ are the creation of Allah
37|97|They said, "Let us build a (furnace shaped) pyre for him, and let us toss him into the blazing fire (burning inside)
37|98|Skillfully, they devised a plan against him, but We made their plans go awry and We humiliated them. We brought them down
37|99|(After his rescue) he said, "I am going towards my Lord! He will guide me
37|100|My Lord, grant me a righteous (son)
37|101|So We gave him the glad tidings of a gentle lad
37|102|When that boy was old enough to share his father´s interests, Ibraheem said, "Oh my son, in my dream I saw myself slaughtering you (by His command)! So now, tell me what you think?" The son said, "Oh my father, do carry out your command. You will find me _ if Allah so wills _ patient and steadfast
37|103|When both agreed to submit (their wills to Allah), the father flung his son down on his face
37|104|That is when We called out, "Oh Ibraheem
37|105|You have made this dream come true! We reward the righteous ones in this manner
37|106|In fact, this was meant to be a clear (and specific) trial for you
37|107|Therefore, We offered in exchange (for his son) the great sacrifice (the rite of sacrifice on the day after Hajj)
37|108|And among the generations to follow We let his name be honored and revered
37|109|Peace is upon Ibraheem
37|110|This is how We reward the righteous ones
37|111|Indeed, he was one of Our (obedient and) believing servants
37|112|We gave him the good news of the birth of Ishaq _ a righteous prophet
37|113|We blessed him and Ishaq. Now, some of their descendants are righteous, while others (disbelieved and so) are unjust to their own selves
37|114|And We certainly bestowed Our favor upon Musa, and (his brother) Haroon
37|115|And We rescued them, and their nation, from an awful torture
37|116|And We came to their aid. So they ended up being the victors
37|117|And We gave them the divine book (so they may know right from wrong)
37|118|And We guided them to the straight path
37|119|And among the generations to follow, We let their names be honored and revered
37|120|Peace is upon Musa and Haroon
37|121|This is really how We reward the righteous ones
37|122|Those two were among Our (obedient and) believing servants
37|123|And Ilyas, too, was one of the messengers
37|124|He said to his people, "Do you not fear Allah
37|125|Do you pray to (the idol) ´Baal´ (a bull believed to be a god of fertility) while you quit (worshipping) the Best of the creators
37|126|Allah, your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers
37|127|But they (disbelieved and) called him a liar. Therefore, they will certainly be present there (on the Day of Judgment to face the punishment)
37|128|Except the sincere servants of Allah
37|129|And among the generations to follow, We let his name be honored and revered
37|130|Peace be upon Ilyas
37|131|This is really how We reward the righteous ones
37|132|Indeed, he was one of Our (obedient and) believing servants
37|133|´Loot´ was also one of the messengers
37|134|We rescued him and all the members of his family
37|135|Except an old woman destined to stay behind
37|136|Then We destroyed the others _ all the rest of them
37|137|In fact, you do pass by their ruins during the day
37|138|And during the night! Don´t you have any sense
37|139|And surely, Yunus was also one of the messengers
37|140|He (abandoned his post and) fled aboard a crowded ship
37|141|(To save the ship) he agreed to take part in the casting of the lots _ and lost. (Hence, he was thrown overboard)
37|142|A whale swallowed him. He was (at fault and) blame worthy
37|143|He was one of those who (extol and) glorify Allah routinely
37|144|Else, he would have stayed in the belly of the fish till the day of resurrection
37|145|But We tossed him ashore in a barren area without any shade. He was stricken with illness and emaciated
37|146|We grew a plant _ a creeper _ over and around (to shade and protect) him
37|147|(Later), We sent him back to the community of a hundred thousand plus
37|148|They believed, so We had them enjoy life for a while
37|149|Ask their opinion. (Is it fair that) your Lord should have daughters while they prefer sons for themselves
37|150|Or did We create the angels as female beings? Were they present there, watching
37|151|Beware! What they utter is certainly self-conceived, and merely fiction
37|152|(Do they say) Allah has borne a child? Of course they are lying
37|153|Does He (really) prefer daughters over sons
37|154|What is wrong with you? How can you hold such views
37|155|Won´t you (reflect and) come back to your senses
37|156|Or do you have a clear authority (to hold such views)
37|157|So bring your scriptures (and quote your authority) if you are truthful
37|158|They conjure up kinship between Him and the jinn. But (all) jinn are well aware that the evildoers will have to appear before Him (for reckoning)
37|159|Allah is Exalted _ infinitely more Sublime than what they describe
37|160|The sincere servants of Allah are excepted _ (they associate no one with Allah)
37|161|Of course you and those (false gods) you worship
37|162|Can never tempt and entice away
37|163|Anybody except the one who will burn in the fire of hell
37|164|(The angels say) "Every single one of us has been assigned a place
37|165|(Before Him). We, too stand in rows to pray
37|166|We, too, (extol His glory and) chant His praises
37|167|They surely used to claim (that)
37|168|Like the earlier people, if we had received the (divine) advice
37|169|Then of course we would have been the chosen people of Allah
37|170|(Divine advice they did receive), but they have rejected it already! So now, they will soon find out
37|171|We already gave Our word to Our servants _ the messengers
37|172|That they would certainly be helped
37|173|Our army would triumph, for sure
37|174|So leave them alone for a while
37|175|Just watch them. Soon they will see the torment themselves
37|176|Are they clamoring for Our torment to be hastened
37|177|For those forewarned, dreadful would be the dawn when the doom descends on their doorstep
37|178|So leave them alone for a while
37|179|Watch them! Soon they will see it
37|180|Glorified is your Lord, the Majestic Lord of honor and power. (He is Free) from the lies they attribute to Him
37|181|Peace is upon the messengers
37|182|And all praise is for Allah, the Lord of the universe
38|1|Suad! (Allah swears) by the Qur´an, which is full of (divine) advice
38|2|In fact, the unbelievers are steeped in arrogance and aversion
38|3|Many generations have We destroyed prior to them. (In the end) they all cried out and pleaded (to be saved); but then it is too late to escape
38|4|They consider it odd that a warner has come to them from amongst themselves. The unbelievers said, "This is a magician, a liar
38|5|Has he replaced all our gods with just One God? That is really astounding
38|6|Their chiefs go about saying, "Go home and hold on to your gods staunchly. This thing is (purposely) designed (against you)
38|7|We have never heard any such thing in other nations, lately. This is nothing but a made up story
38|8|Why was the (divine) advice revealed to him (and not us)? Among us, (why was he chosen)?" No! Rather, it is My advice that they doubt (and challenge). In fact, they have not tasted My punishment yet
38|9|Do they have _ to own (and to distribute) _ the treasures of the mercy of your Powerful Lord, the Generous Grantor of gifts
38|10|Or do they own the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and everything in between? So, let them ascend up (to the heaven) by their means. (Alternate meaning: So, let them rise to the top of this world)
38|11|They are just one small group out of many (that were bigger and much stronger). They are (destined) to be routed right here (on their home turf)
38|12|Prior to them, many (groups) rejected the messengers, like the nation of Nooh, the ´Aads´ and the pharaoh _ the one so firmly fortified
38|13|(And like) the Samood, the nation of Loot, and the people of ´Aikah´. (Now), they were (much stronger) groups
38|14|Every single one of them rejected the messenger, and so justly deserved My punishment
38|15|Now, what these people here (have been warned about and) are waiting for is nothing but a single mighty blast. There won´t be (the need for) a second blast
38|16|They say, "Our Lord, rush our share (of the punishment) to us right now, before the day of reckoning
38|17|Bear everything they say patiently (oh prophet), and remember Our servant Da´ood, the one with strength. He constantly turned to Allah (for guidance)
38|18|We tamed the mountains for him. Every nightfall and morning, they sang along the praises (of Allah) with him
38|19|Birds used to gather around. They all turned to Him (and chanted His praises)
38|20|We strengthened his domain and granted him wisdom, and (eloquent) persuasive speech
38|21|Has the tale of the two litigants reached you? They scaled the wall (of the palace to gain entry) into the royal chambers
38|22|Da´ood was scared when they entered his room. They said, "Do not be afraid. The two of us have a dispute. One of us has unjustly harmed the other. So, settle our dispute fairly. Do not stray from the just course. Guide us to the right path
38|23|One of them said, "This, here, is my brother. He had ninety-nine lambs, while I had only one lamb. Yet he said to me, ´Hand over your lamb to me.´ He persuaded (and prevailed over) me with his (eloquent) speech
38|24|(Da´ood) said, "He certainly wronged you by asking for your lamb to join his herd (of ninety-nine lambs). Indeed, most friends and family members often treat each other unjustly, except those who believe and perform righteous deeds. Such ones (however) are few." And then Da´ood realized, that We had put him through a test (by this incident). So, he sought forgiveness of his Lord. He fell down prostrate and turned to Him in repentance
38|25|So We forgave him. Indeed, he has a high status with Us _ an excellent place to return
38|26|(We said), "Oh Da´ood, We have certainly appointed you Our deputy in the land. Therefore, settle the disputes between people with justice. Do not be swayed by your whims and wishes. Else, you will stray from the path of Allah. Indeed, there is a severe punishment for those who stray from the path of Allah _ because they forget the day of reckoning
38|27|We did not create this _ the heaven, the earth and everything in between _ without a purpose. (In fact) those who do not believe, think otherwise. Misery is for the unbelievers. They will be in fire (forever)
38|28|Should We make those who believe and perform good deeds share the same fate as those who spread corruption in this world? Should We treat the righteous ones and the wicked ones alike
38|29|(Oh prophet)! We have revealed to you a book full of blessings, so that people may ponder over its verses, and so that those with sense and insight may heed its advice
38|30|To Da´ood We gave (a son), Sulaiman. What a wonderful (person and a) servant (of Allah)! Indeed, he (frequently) turned (to Allah) in repentance
38|31|One day in the late afternoon, swift-footed highbred horses were presented to him
38|32|He said, "I relished (and indulged in) these good things (of this world), and failed to remember my Lord. (He missed the evening prayer). When the horses (ran and) vanished from sight behind the screen (of dust they kicked off), he ordered
38|33|Bring them back to me!" He began to slash their legs and napes (with his sword)
38|34|We certainly put Sulaiman through a test. We raised (his heir) to the throne to be just a figure _ just a body (inept and incompetent). Then He repented and turned back (from his desire to bequeath the throne to one of his own descendants)
38|35|He said, "My Lord, grant me forgiveness! Grant me an empire, the like of which no one shall ever have after me. Certainly, You are the (real) Grantor
38|36|So We gave him control over the wind. Upon his orders, it gently sped towards the region of his choice
38|37|(And under his control, We placed) the Shaitans _ all the builders and the divers
38|38|And others bound in chains
38|39|(We said) "This is Our gift to you! Without (the fear of) reckoning, you may bestow it _ or hold it back _ upon whomever you wish
38|40|Indeed, he has a high status with Us, and an excellent place to return
38|41|And remember Our servant Ayub. He called his Lord (saying), "Shaitan really heckles me (with doubts; I am stricken) with hardship and distress
38|42|(We said), "With your foot, stamp the ground; (under it is a spring), cool water to bathe and drink
38|43|We gave his family back to him. And as a blessing from Us, We gave him many more (children) _ a reminder for those who reflect
38|44|(We said to Ayub) "Do not break your oath. (Instead) take a bundle of thin grass and with it (lightly) strike (the person you swore to lash; you were sick at that time)." We really found him patient. What a wonderful person! Indeed, he constantly turned to Us in repentance
38|45|And remember Our servant Ibraheem, Ishaq and Yaqub. They all had insight and the strength of character
38|46|We especially chose them because they (always) remembered the house of the hereafter
38|47|According to Our judgment, they were certainly among the best, the excellent
38|48|And remember Ismail, ´Al-yasaa´ and ´Dhul-Kifl´. They are all among the excellent ones
38|49|This (Qur´an) is a reminder! Indeed, for the righteous one there is an excellent place to go to (after death)
38|50|Eternal paradise! With its gates held open for them (allowing them free and unhindered access)
38|51|There, seated comfortably, they would order and receive (exotic and) plentiful fruits and drinks
38|52|With them, would be the chaste females of the same age _ those with eyes only for their mates
38|53|(They would be told) "All this was promised to be yours on the day of reckoning
38|54|Certainly, such is Our grant to you! It will never run out
38|55|All that (is for the righteous)! But for the transgressors, there is a worst place to return
38|56|Hell, which will roast them! An abominable abode
38|57|(It is appropriate for them)! So let them quench their thirst with boiling water, pus and discharge from wounds
38|58|And other (despicable) torments of that sort
38|59|(As the fresh crop of unbelievers is hurled into hell, those already there will say), "This is the group entering (hell) to stay. No welcome for them! They shall burn in the fire
38|60|(The newcomers will respond) "Actually there is no welcome for you either. You led us here into hell, the worst of the places
38|61|They will say, "Our Lord, increase the torment by fire twice as much for the one who has brought this (fate) upon us
38|62|They will say, "What is the matter? We don´t see here (in hell) those men we used to consider wicked (in the previous life)
38|63|We had made them the target of ridicule! Why do our eyes fail to spot them (here)
38|64|Definitely! That is the truth! Those in hellfire will bicker and wrangle (just like that)
38|65|Say (oh prophet)! "Actually, I am only a warner! There is no god but Allah, the One and Only, the Almighty
38|66|The Sustainer of the heavens and the earth and everything in between, the most Powerful and the most Forgiving
38|67|Say, "That is the greatest news
38|68|You are turning away from it
38|69|I had no knowledge of the high chiefs, (the angels), as they discussed among themselves (the creation of Adam)
38|70|This was revealed to me (for no other reason) except that I am really _ and clearly _ a warner
38|71|Your Lord said to the angels, "I am really going to create man from clay
38|72|You must fall down prostrate before him (in submission), after I have fashioned him and have breathed into him the spirit created by Me
38|73|Accordingly, the angels _ all of them together _ fell prostrate
38|74|But Iblees (the Shaitan) did not! He displayed arrogance, and was (always) a disbeliever
38|75|(Allah) said, "Oh Iblees, what kept you from falling prostrate before a being I created with My hands? Are you too proud (to bow)? Or are you one of the high and the exalted
38|76|(Iblees) said, "I am better than him. You created me from fire, while You created him from clay
38|77|(Allah) said, "Get out of here! Indeed, you are damned
38|78|You shall carry My curse till the day of resurrection
38|79|(Iblees) said, "My Lord, give me a chance (to prove my point) till the day they shall be raised (back to life)
38|80|(Allah) said, "You are (hereby) being granted the respite
38|81|Till the day of that appointed time
38|82|(Iblees) said, "I swear by Your Might, (oh Lord)! I will definitely tempt and lead all of them astray
38|83|Except those among them that are Your true and sincere servants
38|84|(Allah said) "The truth is _ and (nothing but) truth I (always) speak
38|85|That I will most certainly pack the hellfire with you and all those who follow you
38|86|Tell them, "I do not ask of you any compensation. I am not an imposter
38|87|It (the Quran) really is a reminder for all the worlds
38|88|After a while, you will certainly come to know about it yourself
39|1|The revelation (contained) in this book emanates from Allah, the Mighty and the Wise
39|2|Indeed, We sent you the book with the truth. So worship Allah, and keep your faith exclusively for Him
39|3|Beware! Faith (and religion) made exclusively for Allah is His right. Those who accept patrons other than Allah say, "We do not worship them. But they serve to bring us closer to (and let us concentrate on) Allah." Allah will settle all matters of dispute between people. Indeed, Allah does not guide any ungrateful liar
39|4|If Allah (really) wanted to have a son, He could have picked anyone He wanted out of His created beings. Glory be to Him! He is Allah! The Only One, (the Compeller), the Invincible
39|5|He created the heavens and the earth with a purpose. He makes the night succeed the day, and He has the day follow the night. He has subjected the sun and the moon (and has pressed them into service) for your sake. Each is afloat for a specified time. Is He not the most Powerful and the oft-Forgiving
39|6|He created you (all) from a single being. Out of it, He created its spouse. He gave you eight types (four pairs: males and females of each) of domestic animals _ (sheep, goats, cows and camels). He created you in your mothers´ wombs, shaping you from one form to another _ through three (distinct kinds of) darkened zones. Such is Allah, your Lord! His is the empire (of the entire universe)! There is no god except He! How dare you turn away
39|7|If you disbelieve (remember), Allah does not stand in need of you. (But) if you express gratitude, He is pleased with you. No one will carry the burden (of sin) for anybody else. Then, (carrying the load of your own sins) you must journey back to your Lord. He will tell you what you used to do. Indeed, He knows even that which lies (buried) in the chest
39|8|When distress befalls man, he calls his Lord in repentance. But he forgets when his Lord (responds and) bestows His blessings _ forgets that he had ever called his Lord. To stray from the (straight) path (and to make others stray from it), he assigns partners for Allah. (Oh Muhammad, SAW) say, "(Stay) in your denial (and) enjoy for a while. You will certainly end up in hell
39|9|Could the one who is obedient (ever go to hell)? The one who prostrates before Allah and stands (in prayers) during all of hours of the night? The one who dreads the afterlife and hopes for the mercy of his Lord? Ask (them), "Can those who know, be equal to the ones who do not?" In fact, only the sensible ones heed (the advice)
39|10|Say, "Fear your Lord, oh servants (of Allah) who believe! The favorable outcome is for those who perform good deeds in this life. Allah´s land is spacious. Those who endure patiently would, in fact, be (compensated well and) rewarded in full without any reckoning
39|11|Say, "I have been ordered to worship Allah (exclusively), keeping my religion exclusively for Him
39|12|I have been ordered to be the first to submit and surrender
39|13|Indeed, I fear the punishment of that mighty day, in case I disobey my Lord
39|14|Limiting my religion exclusively for Him, it is Allah Whom I worship
39|15|You may worship others besides Him if you want." Say (further that), "The worst of the losers are those who make their families _ and themselves _ suffer severe losses on the Day of Judgment. Beware! That is evidently the greatest loss
39|16|Sheets of blazing fire will blanket them from above, and a raging fire will engulf them from below. Regarding this, Allah cautions His servants, "Oh my servants, fear Me
39|17|There is good news for those who shun the worship of false gods _ (the epitome of transgression) _ and turn to Allah in repentance. So let My servants hear the glad tidings
39|18|Those who heed the advice, and implement its best features are the ones whom Allah has guided! Such are the sensible ones
39|19|The one who deserves the sentence of the (eternal) punishment (cannot be helped). Can you rescue the one who is (as good as) in the fire
39|20|For those who fear their Lord, there exist lofty mansions with (several) floors built one atop another, and with rivers running right through. (That is) Allah´s promise! And Allah does not back out of His promise
39|21|Do you not see that Allah sends water down from the sky? Then, He channels it into rivers and springs across the earth, and produces with it vegetation of all different (kinds and) colors. But then it withers and you see it fade and (turn) yellow. Later, He turns it into chaff. Indeed, there is a lesson in it for any sensible person
39|22|Allah has rendered the hearts (of some of His servants) receptive for Islam. They follow the illumilating guidance of their Lord. Can they be like the unbelievers? Misery is for those whose hearts harden up even more by the mention of Allah. They indeed are clearly on the wrong path
39|23|Allah has revealed the very best of the narrative. The oft-repeated contents of this book are coherent, consistent and coupled _ (the promise of rewards is coupled with the threat of punishment). Those who fear their Lord are awestruck by it. Their flesh shudders with fright, and their hearts and souls become mellow with the remembrance of Allah. Such is the guidance of Allah! He guides whomever He wants! There is no guide for the one whom Allah leads astray
39|24|So, (imagine the plight of) the one who will _ (being helpless) on the Day of Judgment _ bear the punishment right smack on his face. The evildoers would be told, "Here, taste what you have wrought upon yourself
39|25|The earlier people had rejected. As a result, punishment came to them from where they least expected
39|26|Thus, Allah had them taste the shame of disgrace in the life of this world, and of course the punishment of the afterlife is much worse. If only they had realized
39|27|Indeed, We have placed in this Qur´an various kinds of examples before the people. Perhaps, they will reflect
39|28|The Qur´an is in Arabic; (it is simple), without any distortion or deviation. Perhaps they will fear Him
39|29|Allah quotes an example. (There are two slaves), one belongs to many partners pitted against each other, while the other belongs entirely to one master. Can these two men fare equally? All praise is for Allah! But most people do not realize
39|30|(Oh prophet)! Of course you will die! And for sure, they will die too
39|31|Then, on the Day of Judgment you all would place your disputes before your Lord
39|32|Could there be any one worse than the person who utters a lie about Allah and rejects the truth when it reaches him? For such an unbeliever, isn´t there an (appropriate) abode in the hellfire
39|33|While those who accept the truth and believe it with sincerity are indeed the righteous ones
39|34|With their Lord, they shall have whatever they desire. Such is the reward for the righteous
39|35|So that Allah may pardon their bad deeds; and so that He may grant them their compensation _ reward far in excess of what their good deeds deserve
39|36|Isn´t Allah sufficient for His servants? The unbelievers try to daunt (and discourage) you with the fear of others instead of Him. There is no guide for the one whom Allah leads astray
39|37|(In the same manner), the one whom Allah guides cannot be thrown off track. Isn´t Allah the most Powerful _ the Lord of Retribution
39|38|If you were to ask them, ´Who created the heavens and the earth?´, they will no doubt reply, ´Allah!´ Say, "What do you think about those who pray to others besides Allah? Can they alleviate my distress, should Allah intend to inflict a distress upon me? Could they withhold His mercy, if Allah wanted to shower His mercy upon me?" Say, "Allah is enough for me! Those seeking (a trustee) should place their trust in Allah
39|39|Say, "Oh my people! Carry on with your practice, while I too will continue my way. Soon, you will come to know
39|40|(You will find out) who deserves the disgraceful punishment, and upon whom lands the unshakable torment
39|41|Indeed, We have revealed the book to you for the (good of the) people. It is the truth! Now, whoever finds the right way does so for his own good, and whoever strays harms himself. (Oh prophet)! You are not (appointed) a manager over them
39|42|At the time of death, Allah takes full possession of the soul of the deceased, and also the souls of those who are asleep and not dead. He then holds back those for whom He has decreed death. He sends back the souls of others for an appointed time. In that, indeed, is a sign for a nation that ponders
39|43|Or have they, instead of Allah, accepted mediators (to worship)? Ask them, "Even though they have no power, and may understand nothing
39|44|Say, "All mediation and intervention belongs to Allah exclusively! To Him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth! You will be sent back to Him
39|45|Those who do not believe in the afterlife are saddened when only Allah´s name is mentioned in their presence. Their hearts shrink in disgust. But they suddenly become joyous when others beside Allah are mentioned
39|46|Say, "Oh Allah, the Creator of the heavens and the earth, the Knower of the unseen and the manifest! You will settle disputes between Your servants _ the disputes they are arguing about now
39|47|On the Day of Judgment, the evildoers would offer as a ransom their entire wealth in exchange for exemption from the terrible punishment, even if they owned everything in this world, and that much more to go with it. (The punishment) from Allah would then become apparent to them. They never imagined (its severity)
39|48|The evil of the actions they had committed would then become apparent to them. That, which they used to mock would overwhelm them
39|49|When the distress afflicts man, he prays to Us (for relief). But once We grant him Our blessings, he says, "In fact, I have been granted all this because of my (superior) knowledge." Of course not! Rather, it is a test for him! But most of them do not know
39|50|The (people who lived) before their time had said the very same things. But their achievements, the deeds (and wealth) they earned, were of no use to them
39|51|Thus, the evil deeds they had gathered brought them down. The same is true for these (present day) evildoers. The evil deeds they accumulate will soon strike them down. They cannot render (Allah) helpless
39|52|Do they not know? Allah increases the provisions _ or restricts them _ for whomever He wants. Indeed, in that is certainly a sign for any believing nation
39|53|(Oh prophet)! Declare, "Oh my servants! Oh you who have overly and unduly burdened yourself (with sins)! Do not abandon hope in the mercy of Allah. Of course Allah pardons all sins! Indeed He is the most Forgiving; and the most Merciful
39|54|Turn to your Lord in repentance, and submit to Him before the punishment comes upon you. Lest (it is too late and) you cannot be helped
39|55|Follow the excellent advice revealed to you by your Lord before the time (arrives) when the punishment will creep up on you stealthily and you would not realize
39|56|Then the (evil) person would say, "Oh pity on me! Concerning Allah I was too neglectful (and I went too far). I was among those who used to mock
39|57|Then he will say, "I would have been a God-fearing person, had Allah guided me
39|58|As he witnesses the (oncoming) punishment, he would wail, "Oh! If I had a second chance, I would be righteous
39|59|No! In fact My signs (and guidance) did come to you! And you did reject them. You displayed arrogance. You were the disbeliever
39|60|On the Day of Judgment, you will see! The faces of those who invented lies about Allah would be tainted and tarnished. Isn´t there a place in hell for the proud and the haughty
39|61|Allah will rescue those who fear the effect (of their actions). Nothing bad will happen to them. They shall not feel sorry
39|62|Allah is the Creator of everything, and He is the Guardian over everything
39|63|He has the keys to (the treasures of) the heavens and the earth. Indeed the losers are those who reject the signs of Allah
39|64|Say, "Are you then asking me to worship beings other than Allah? You ignorant fools
39|65|It has been revealed to you just as it had been revealed to those before you, that if you commit ´shirk´ (associate partners with Allah) your (good) deeds would surely come to naught, and you would definitely be the losers
39|66|Instead, worship Allah (exclusively) and be grateful
39|67|They did not appreciate or revere Allah as He rightfully deserves to be appreciated. On the Day of Judgment this earth would be (held nipped) in His fist, and the heavens would lie folded across His right (forearm). Exalted is He! Far above everything they associate and affiliate with Him
39|68|Then, as the trumpet sounds, all (living beings) in the heavens and on earth would fall unconscious _ except whomever Allah wishes to keep alive. Then, the trumpet will blare for the second time and at once, everyone would stand alert, looking around
39|69|The light emanating from the Lord will flood the earth, (brighten it up) and make it glitter. The book (of deeds) will be placed (in evidence). The prophets and (other) witnesses would be at hand (to testify). The matter would be settled with justice. No one would be wronged at all
39|70|Everyone will be compensated in full for (every) action they (ever) did; He is well Aware of what they do
39|71|Successive groups of unbelievers would be dispatched to hell. As the gates of hell open, the keepers (of hell) would ask, "Had the messengers from amongst your own (people) not come to (warn) you? Didn´t they recite to you the verses of your Lord, warning you about the encounters of this day?" They will reply, "Yes (they did)!" The sentence of torment is (fair and) justified for the unbelievers
39|72|They would be ordered to enter the gates of hell and live there till eternity. Evil is the abode for the arrogant
39|73|(In sharp contrast), the successive groups of those who (believed and) feared their Lord would be ushered into paradise. As its gates open, its keepers would greet them saying, "Peace be with you! Well done! Enter the paradise to live there till eternity
39|74|They would explain, "All praise is for Allah Who redeemed His promise (made) to us, and He gave us this land to inherit. (Now) we can settle down anywhere we want in paradise. What an excellent reward for the doers (of good)
39|75|You will see the angels gathered around the throne (of Allah) chanting the praises of their Lord. All matters between people would be decided (and disposed of) with justice. The declaration will resound, "All praise is for Allah, the Sustainer of the universe
40|1|Ha! Meem
40|2|The revelation of this book (the Qur´an), is Allah, the Powerful and the Knowledgeable
40|3|(He is the sole authority) to pardon the sins and to accept repentance! (He is) the stern and stringent Punisher, and the Lord and Master of (unbridled absolute) might. There is no god but He! Towards Him is the (final) destination
40|4|Except the unbelievers, no one disputes the signs of Allah. But do not let their exploits and activities in this world ever deceive you
40|5|Earlier, the people of Nooh and other groups after them, had rejected the truth. Every nation pounced on the messengers (of Allah), and attempted to quarrel with them by unfair and foul means. (They tried) to refute and undermine the truth by such means. (At last) I nabbed them. So (observe) how (severe) was My punishment
40|6|Thus, concerning the unbelievers, the words of your Lord prevailed and came to pass. They are the companions of hellfire
40|7|Those (angels) carrying His throne, and others present nearby, (incessantly) sing the praises of their Lord. They believe in Him and they seek His forgiveness for (all) those who believe in Him. They say, "Oh our Lord, You control and dominate everything with knowledge and mercy. Forgive those who turn to You in repentance and follow Your (straight) path. Save them from the torment of hellfire
40|8|Oh Lord, usher the righteous ones, their parents, mates and offspring into paradise _ the paradise of Eden You have promised them. You are certainly the Powerful and the Wisest
40|9|(Oh Lord)! Save them from the evil (outcome)! The one spared the evil (outcome) that day (would be successful) because of Your mercy upon him. That, in fact is the greatest (possible) success
40|10|(On the Day of Judgment) the unbelievers would be informed, "Surely at this time you hate yourself. But earlier (in the previous life) Allah´s hatred for you was far greater, because you refused when you were invited to believe
40|11|They will say, "Our Lord, twice You gave us death and twice You brought us back to life! Now, we confess our sins, (oh Lord), is there any option (still open to us) to evade (the torment)
40|12|(They will be told) "You deserve this plight because when Allah, the One and the Only, was being worshipped, you turned away in disbelief. But you (readily) accepted when partners were set up with Him. Now the decision rests solely with Allah, the Exalted and the Greatest
40|13|It is He, Who shows you His signs and sends down the provisions for you from the sky. Only the one who turns in repentance (to Allah) heeds the advice
40|14|So call Allah and keep your faith exclusive for Him, even if the unbelievers dislike and detest
40|15|The One Who is of the highest status, the Owner of the (Exalted) throne, (Allah), sends the spirit carrying His message to any of His servants He wants. So that His servant may sound the alarm about the day of the meeting (with the Lord)
40|16|That day, (everything about) everyone would be fully exposed. Nothing about them is (ever) hidden from Allah. (That day, Allah will ask), "To whom belongs the kingdom today?" (They will respond in unison), "To Allah, the One and Only, (the Compeller) and the Invincible
40|17|Today, every soul will receive compensation according to (the deeds) it has earned. There shall be no injustice today. Allah is very swift in reckoning
40|18|Warn them about the day that creeps closer. The day when the heart will leap up to the throat and throttle it. The evildoers shall not have any protectors, or an acceptable mediator
40|19|Allah knows even the surreptitious and deceitful glance of the eye, as well as the secrets buried deep within the chest
40|20|Allah decides and concludes everything with justice. Those others they pray to beside Him, decide (absolutely) nothing. Allah is certainly the One Who hears and sees (all)
40|21|Have they not moved about in the land? Did they not observe the fate of those (who had lived) before them? They were stronger and left more enduring monuments (and influences) on the earth. But Allah grabbed them for their sins and there was no one to protect them from Allah
40|22|That is so because the messengers brought them clear proofs and they still rejected. Finally Allah seized them! Indeed, He is very Strong and Severe in punishment
40|23|We had certainly sent Musa with Our signs, and the manifest proofs
40|24|Towards the pharaoh, Haaman and Qaroon! But they said, "(He is) a magician! A liar
40|25|When he brought to them the truth from Us, they said, "Kill the sons of those who believe in Musa, and let their daughters live." But the evil tricks of the unbelievers always go awry
40|26|And the pharaoh said, "Let me kill Musa. Let him call his Lord (to rescue him). I am really afraid that he might change your way of life, or he might spread unrest in the country
40|27|Musa responded, "I have sought refuge with my Lord and your Lord from every haughty person who does not believe in the day of reckoning
40|28|A man from the nation of pharaoh, who was a believer and was hiding his faith, said, "Would you kill a man just because he asserts that Allah is his Lord? He has brought you clear proofs from your Lord! Should he be a liar, let his lie be upon his conscience. But if he happens to be truthful, then you might suffer from some of the things with which he has threatened you! Indeed, Allah does not guide a liar and a transgressor
40|29|Oh people, today the empire belongs to you and it is the dominant power in the world! But who will help us if the wrath of Allah comes down upon us?" The pharaoh said, "I only express what I think. I guide you along the path of reason (and logic)
40|30|The one who had believed said, "(Oh my) people! I am really afraid that you might encounter (the same fate) as did the people of earlier times
40|31|The kind of fate that befell the nations of Nooh, ´Aads´, ´Samoods´ and others after them. Allah does not intend to be unjust to His servants
40|32|Oh people! I am really afraid that the day of wailing might overwhelm you. In a frantic frenzy, you would call each other (for help)
40|33|That day you would turn your backs and flee (in desperation). You shall have no one to protect you from Allah. Indeed, there is no guide for the one whom Allah misguides
40|34|Earlier, Yusuf had brought you obvious proofs, but you remained skeptical about what he brought you. When he died you claimed that Allah would never raise another messenger after him. This is how Allah leads the transgressors and the skeptics astray
40|35|Those who bicker about the verses of Allah without a valid reason or without any revelation having come to them! According to Allah, as well as those who believe, such an act is very disgusting. This is how Allah places a seal upon the heart of every arrogant and bullying person
40|36|The pharaoh said, "Oh Haaman, build me a lofty tower so I may attain the (right) means
40|37|The means to (reach) the heaven, so I may look at Musa´s God! But I really think he, (Musa), is just lying." Thus the wickedness of pharoah´s action was made to appear adorable to him, and he was prevented from the (straight) path. The tricks of the pharaoh merely led him to his ruin
40|38|The one who had believed said, "Oh my people! Follow me. Let me guide you along the (sensible) virtuous path
40|39|Oh my people, the life of this world is in fact a brief and transient enjoyment. While the afterlife is certainly the place of permanence
40|40|The punishment of the one who does evil would only be equal to _ (and would not exceed) _ the nature (and the severity) of his sin. On the other hand, the men and women who perform the righteous deeds _ provided they are the believers _ would surely be the ones entering paradise. They would be granted abundant (infinite and endless) bounties without reckoning
40|41|Oh my people, how (strange) is it, that I call you towards salvation but you respond by inviting me towards the hellfire
40|42|You are asking me to reject Allah and set up partners with Him. I know nothing about (any partners)! The One I call you towards, (Allah), is the most Powerful and the most Forgiving
40|43|No doubt at all! The one you are calling me towards, (Shaitan), in fact has no authority _ neither in this world, nor in the afterlife! Our return is surely towards Allah, and the transgressors are surely the companions of the fire
40|44|Soon you will recall what I am telling you now. I entrust my affairs to Allah. Indeed, Allah watches over His servants
40|45|So, Allah protected that believer from the evil schemes they hatched (against him). Instead, a treacherous torture engulfed the pharaoh (and his followers)
40|46|Now, every morning and every evening they are brought before the fire; (and that will continue unabated) until the day the hour of judgment takes place. (Then, the order would be), "Throw the pharaoh and his people into an even worse torture
40|47|And (imagine) when they would argue with each other in the hellfire. The weak (in this life) would say to those who deemed themselves important, "We followed you, because we were under your dominion and control. Are you now able to help us avoid some (of the pain and suffering) of the fire
40|48|Those who pretend to be great would reply, "We are all in it together. Allah has already settled (all matters) between people
40|49|Those in fire will say to the keeper of hell, "On our behalf, would you (please) ask your Lord to ease our punishment for just a day
40|50|The keeper of hell will reply, "Didn´t the messengers (of Allah) bring you the clear proofs?" They will reply, "Yes they did!" The keepers will then say, "So ask (Him) yourself!" But the calls (and prayers) of the unbelievers would come to no avail
40|51|We certainly help Our messengers and the believers in the life of this world. So, too, (We would help them) on the day the witnesses take stand
40|52|That day, the excuses (and apologies) of the evildoers would not benefit them at all. A curse would be (placed) upon them, and theirs would be the most abhorrent abode
40|53|We had surely granted Musa the guidance, and We made the Israelites inherit the book
40|54|Which was the guidance and advice for those with sense and intelligence
40|55|So, (be sure and) remain patient. The promise of your Lord is really true! Ask for your sins to be pardoned; and sing the praises of your Lord (every) morning and evening
40|56|Indeed those who argue about the verses of Allah _ concerning which no revelation (or knowledge) has come to them _ have nothing but pride (and images of self-grandeur) in their heart. Never shall they attain (such greatness). So seek refuge with Allah. Indeed He, (and only He) sees and hears all
40|57|Truly, creating the heavens and the earth is far greater than creating (and re-creating) the human beings. But most people (just) do not know
40|58|The blind and the one with sight cannot be equal. Similarly, the believers performing good deeds, and the evil ones cannot be equal. Seldom do you reflect
40|59|Very definitely, the hour (of judgment) is coming! There is no doubt about it! But most people (just) do not believe
40|60|Your Lord says, "Address your prayers to Me and I will grace them with acceptance. Indeed, those who disdainfully turn away from worshipping Me will soon enter the hellfire, shamed and disgraced
40|61|Allah it is Who created the night for you to rest, and (He made) the day bright. Allah is surely very Gracious (and Benevolent) for the people. Yet, most people are (just) not grateful
40|62|Such is Allah, your Lord, the Creator of every (single) thing! There is no god but He! Why then are you (letting yourself be) hoodwinked
40|63|Those rejecting the signs (and verses) of Allah had also been deceived the same way
40|64|It is Allah Who arranged for this earth to be your (temporary) abode, and the sky to be the dome over you. He fashioned you in the best possible form and granted you the most wholesome (provisions). Such is Allah, your Lord! (High and) Hallowed is Allah, the Lord of the world
40|65|He is very much Alive _ (Vital and Vigorous)! There is no god but He. Therefore, call Him, and keep your faith exclusively for Him. All praise is for Allah, the Sustainer of the world
40|66|Say, "In fact, forbidden upon me is the worship of those you call (for help) other than Allah. Clear proofs have come to me from my Lord. I have been ordered to submit to (none except) the Lord of the world
40|67|It is He Who created you first from dust and then from a drop (of semen), and then from a clot of blood. He brought you out as (a weak and helpless) infant. Then, (He lets you grow) so you may achieve your full potential. (He lets you live further) so that you may reach an advanced old age. (He causes) some of you to die prematurely! (All this is done) so you may reach the appointed time (set by Him), and so that you may understand (the reality of life)
40|68|It is He Who gives life as well as death. When He decides that an event should occur, He just says ´Be!´ and (at once) it becomes
40|69|Do you (ever) wonder about those who contest and dispute the verses of Allah? (What are they turning away from)? What are they being diverted to
40|70|Those who have rejected the book, and that which We revealed to Our messenger, would soon come to know (and regret)
40|71|(They would regret the decision to disbelieve) when, bound in chains and with shackles around their necks, they would be dragged
40|72|(Against their will) into the boiling water! After that, they would be hurled into the hellfire
40|73|Then they would be asked, "Where are those (gods) you used to worship
40|74|Instead of Allah?" They will reply, "They have all ceased to exist _ vanished! Actually, earlier, we never really prayed to anything at all." In this manner, Allah lets the unbelievers go astray
40|75|(You suffer this plight) because you used to rejoice in the (affairs of the) world without any right (or reason), and because you used to gloat and exult (about falsehood)
40|76|(Now) enter the gates of hell and live there forever. What an abominable abode for the proud and the haughty
40|77|So be patient (Oh Muhammad, SAW), Allah´s promise is the absolute truth. We might let you watch them undergo some of the punishment We have promised them. Or else, We might first (recall you and) give you death. After all, towards Us they all have to return
40|78|Indeed, We sent (many) messengers before you. We have narrated to you the tales of some of them, and We have told you nothing about the others. Without the permission of Allah (and of his own accord) no messenger could ever perform any miracles. (In the case of all the messengers), once the order came from Allah, the matter was settled with total justice. Those insisting upon falsehood incurred a total loss at that time
40|79|Allah it is, Who created the cattle so you may ride them, or eat their flesh
40|80|You obtain many benefits from them. You also fulfill with them some of the other needs you have in mind (e.g. transporting goods). Mounted on them and aboard ships, you are transported (across land and sea)
40|81|He points out to you (so many of) His signs. How many signs of Allah will you deny
40|82|Have they not moved about in the land? Do they not see the fate of the people who lived before them? They were stronger and more in number. They have left their traces and vestiges in the land. What they earned (in this life) did not help them at all
40|83|Even though the messengers brought them clear proofs, yet they remained (smugly) pleased and contented with the (deficient) knowledge they possessed. Finally the torment they used to mock and ridicule, actually did surround them completely
40|84|Then, as they eyed the punishment they cried out, "We (now) believe in Allah, the One and the Only, and we reject everything (and everyone) we used to associate with Him
40|85|But their belief conferred no benefits upon them at all, (because they accepted only) after having witnessed Our (power and) punishment. (Such is) the established practice of Allah. It has always been in effect for all His servants. At that time, the unbelievers suffered a (total) loss
41|1|Ha! Meem
41|2|This is a communiqué from the most Merciful and the most Kind
41|3|A book whose verses are distinct and described in detail. The Qur´an is (revealed) in the Arabic language for the people who know (Arabic)
41|4|It bears the good news and also warns. But most of them turn away. They (just) do not listen
41|5|They, (the unbelievers) say, "Our hearts are sheathed, immune from being affected by anything you might say. Our ears are deaf to your call. There is a barrier between you and us, and it sets us apart. So, do as you please and we will do as we please
41|6|Say, "In fact, I am a human being like you. It has been revealed to me that your god is only One God! So, seek the path (that leads) straight to Him, and seek His forgiveness. Misery is for those who associate partners (with Allah)
41|7|Those who do not pay the ´zakat´! Those who deny the life to come
41|8|And the never-ending infinite rewards exist for those who believe, and do the righteous deeds
41|9|Say, "Do you dare to disbelieve in the One Who created the earth in two periods of time? Do you dare to set up others as His equal? It is the Lord of the universe (you have dared to disobey)
41|10|He firmly fixed mountains on the earth, that rise high above its surface, and He blessed the earth. He made arrangements to supply the nourishment needs (for all life forms ever to exist on the earth) in four periods of time. Without exception, (He apportions food) to all who ask for it
41|11|(Then) He turned to the heaven. It was then (just) smoke. To it and the earth, He said, "Willing or not, eager or averse, (you are being ordered to) come into being!" They replied, "We come willingly
41|12|Then He concluded the creation and organized (the smoke) into seven heavens in two periods of time, and revealed to each its duties and responsibilities. We adorned the heaven of this world with luminary bodies, and We secured them. This is the destiny appointed by the Mightiest and the most Knowledgeable
41|13|But if they turn away then say, "I (hereby) warn you about (an overwhelming punishment by) the lightning and thunder, the kind that struck down the people of ´Aads´ and ´Samood´
41|14|The messengers came to them (and told them what lay) ahead of them as well as behind them, and instructed them to worship no one except Allah. But they said, "Had our Lord wanted this, He would have sent us angels (to preach). We (hereby) reject that which (you claim) has been revealed to you
41|15|Just like the people of ´Aads´! Without any reason or right, they conducted themselves arrogantly in this world. They said, "Does anyone excel over us in strength and power?" Could they not see that Allah Who created them, is certainly far superior to them in strength? They used to refute Our signs
41|16|So, in a matter of a few ill-fated days, We devastated them with cold and frigid winds that shrieked past them. Thus, We made them taste a disgraceful punishment in the life of this world. And the punishment of the afterlife is worse, and far more humiliating. They will not be helped
41|17|As for the ´Samood´, We showed them the way, but they preferred to remain blind about the guidance. Therefore, because of what they used to commit, a humiliating punishment of lightning bolts grabbed them
41|18|But We saved those who believed, and used to ward off (evil)
41|19|And (warn them of) the day when the enemies of Allah would be rounded up, (and forced on) towards the hellfire. They would be impelled (and shoved) onwards
41|20|Before they reach the hellfire, their ears, their eyes and their skin would (begin to talk and) bear witness against them, regarding everything they used to do (in this world)
41|21|They will ask their skin, "Why did you testify against us?" (Their skin) would retort, "Allah granted us (the faculty of) speech, the same One Who gives everything the ability to talk. He it is, Who created you the first time, and now you are brought back to Him
41|22|When you used to cover up and conceal your evil deeds, (you never considered) that your ears, your eyes and your skin would testify against you. In fact, you thought that (if you hide your deeds) Allah would not find out much of what you do
41|23|Such notions you had about your Lord! And they actually brought about your fall. You became the losers
41|24|(It does not matter) even if you bear your punishment patiently. The hellfire would be your abode! And if you seek to atone and make amends, you would not be excused
41|25|(In the life of this world), We assigned them friends who made their past and the present _that which was behind them as well as that which was before them _ seem glamorous to them. Thus the verdict became justified for all the generations that had lived prior to them, all the jinn and the human kind. Indeed, they were all losers
41|26|The unbelievers say to each other, "Do not listen to this Qur´an, and during its recital create a disturbance. (That way), perhaps you would dominate (the scene)
41|27|We would definitely make the unbelievers taste a severe punishment. We would certainly inflict upon them a punishment equal to the deeds they used to commit
41|28|The punishment for the enemies of Allah is the hellfire. In it will be their abode till eternity! A (warranted) punishment because they used to deny (Our signs and) Our revelations
41|29|The unbelievers will say, "Our Lord, let us see those among the jinn and the humans who (deceived us and) led us astray. We will place them under our feet and trample them, so as to utterly disgrace and degrade them
41|30|Indeed, angels come down to (befriend) those who say, "Allah is our Lord" and then stay steadfast on it. (To them the angels say), "Have no fear, and do not grieve. (Rather), rejoice! (We bring you) the good news of paradise which you had been promised
41|31|We are your friends in the life of this world, as well as in the afterlife. There, you shall have anything your heart desires. There, whatever you ask for will be yours
41|32|A reception (and divine hospitality) from the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
41|33|Nobody´s assertions could be better (and more trustworthy) than the words of a person who invites others towards (the worship of) Allah, acts righteously and says, "Indeed, I am among those who surrender and submit (to Allah)
41|34|The good and the bad deeds are not alike. Respond to their bad deeds with good ones, and you will find that the person who was hostile and antagonistic towards you has turned into a bosom buddy
41|35|Such an attribute _(a stage of perfection) _ is granted only to those who stay steadfast. Those are the most fortunate
41|36|If the prompting of Shaitan stirs you, seek refuge with Allah. Of course, He hears all and knows all
41|37|The night and the day, and the sun and the moon are among His signs. Do not bow before the sun, or before the moon. Rather, prostrate before Allah, the One Who created them, if it is He Whom you want to worship (exclusively)
41|38|The unbelievers may turn away (from the truth) arrogantly, but those (angels) close to your Lord glorify Him (and chant His praises) day and night. They do not relent
41|39|One of His signs: you see the land dry and desolate. But it suddenly stirs and quivers, and begins to bear (vegetation) just as soon as He sends down the rain upon it. The One Who gives life to the dead land is surely going to bring the dead back to life. Indeed, He is Capable of doing everything
41|40|Those who twist and distort Our verses are, of course, not unknown to Us. So then, who will fare better on the Day of Judgment? The one flung in the hellfire? Or the one who arrives safe and secure (into paradise)? Do what you want. Of course, He watches (and knows) whatever you do
41|41|These people have refused to accept the advice, (the Qur´an), when it came to them, (though) it is definitely a mighty book
41|42|Falsehood can neither confront it head on, nor approach it (stealthily) from behind. (It is) a revelation from the Wise, the One Worthy of praise
41|43|(Oh Muhammad, SAW)! Nothing has been said to you that had not been said to the messengers before you. Indeed, your Lord is (not only) the Lord of forgiveness, (but also) the Lord of the painful punishment
41|44|Had We revealed (this Qur´an) in a non-Arabic language, they would have said, "Why are its verses not clear and understandable? What? A non-Arabic (discourse) and an Arabic (audience)?" Say to them, "For those who believe, this Qur´an is a guidance and a cure (for spiritual ailments). While, it is a plug for the ears and a blindfold for the eyes of those who do not believe. (It is, as if) they (barely) hear being summoned from a far off place
41|45|We had granted Musa the book; it, (too), was (questioned and) disputed. But your Lord´s word has already been decreed. Had it not been for that, their dispute would have been decided (and settled) once and for all. They remained hopelessly in doubt about it (the book)
41|46|Whoever acts righteously does so for his own sake, and whoever commits evil does himself a bad deed. Your Lord is not unjust to His servants
41|47|The knowledge of the hour (of Judgment) is held back by Him. No fruit ever blooms from its bud, and no female ever (conceives and) carries to term except with His knowledge (and permission). On that day (of Judgment), the unbelievers would be asked, "(Now), where are those partners you attributed to Me?" They will reply, "We have confessed before You. None of us can bear witness (about them)
41|48|All the (gods) they used to invoke and pray to would get away from them (and vanish); and they would get the idea that there exists no refuge (on that day)
41|49|Man never tires of praying for the good (things in life), and becomes dejected and despondent when something bad afflicts him
41|50|Indeed, after letting him go through unhappy times, if We let him taste Our blessings (and bounties), he begins to say, "This is (all) mine (because I deserve it). I do not think the hour of judgment would ever be brought into being. But if (per chance) I am sent back to my Lord, nothing but good (things) would await me there from Him." We would certainly relate to them everything they are (now) doing. We would definitely make them taste the worst of the punishment
41|51|When We bestow Our favors upon man, he drifts afar and distances himself (from Us); but when hardship afflicts, he prays (and pleads) long and hard
41|52|Say, "How would you feel if the Qur´an really happens to be from Allah, and yet you reject it? Can anyone be more wrong than the one who has strayed too far (in his hatred)
41|53|Soon, We will show them Our signs in the universe, and even in their own bodies, until it becomes amply clear to them that, indeed, this (Qur´an) is the truth. Is it not enough for you that your Lord (watches and) witnesses every single thing
41|54|Beware! In reality they are skeptical about meeting their Lord. Beware, He has contained and hemmed in every single thing
42|1|Ha, Meem
42|2|Ain, Seen, Qaf
42|3|Thus, Allah the most Powerful and the Wisest, sent revelation to you as well as to those before you
42|4|Whatever is in the heavens and on earth belongs to Him; He is the most Eminent and the most Exalted
42|5|The heavens are on the verge of splitting apart. The angels chant the praises of their Lord; they pray and seek forgiveness for those (living) on earth. Isn´t it Allah (alone) Who is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
42|6|Allah is the Guard (and the Warden) over those who accept others besides Him as protectors. You are in no way responsible for them
42|7|We revealed to you this Qur´an in the Arabic language, so you may alert the people of Makkah and the neighboring communities, so that you may warn them about the day of assembly. About that day there is no doubt! One group will be in paradise, and the other in the hellfire
42|8|Had Allah wanted, He could have created all of them as a single community. But He (selects and) admits to His mercy whomever He wants. The wrongdoers shall not have any protectors or helpers
42|9|Beside Him, have they accepted others as their Lord, although it is Allah (alone) Who is the Master? He gives life to the dead, and He is capable of doing everything
42|10|It is for Allah to (clarify and) resolve all matters concerning which you have differences (of opinion). Such is Allah, my Lord! In Him do I place my trust, to Him I turn (in repentance)
42|11|(He is) the Maker of the heavens and the earth! He created spouses for you from your own kind. He created the cattle in pairs, too. Thus, He (multiplies and) scatters you on the earth. He hears and observes everything
42|12|The keys to the (treasures of) heavens and the earth belong to Him. He expands the provisions _ or limits them _ for whomever He wants. For, He is really Aware (and Mindful) of every single thing
42|13|He enacted rules (and rites) for your religion which are the same (rules) as He decreed for (the messenger) Nooh. What We have revealed to you are the same commandments as We gave to (the messengers) Ibraheem, Musa and Jesus: (namely) to establish the faith and not (disunite and) splinter into sects. (Oh Muhammad, SAW), what you are calling them towards _ (the worship of the One true god, Allah) _ is too burdensome to bear for those accepting other gods beside Him. Allah selects whom He wants, and guides along His path the one who turns to Him (in repentance)
42|14|But they splintered into groups even though (divine) knowledge had already come to them, because they wished to (encroach upon and) violate each other´s rights. The matter between them would have been settled, had it not been for the fact that the verdict of your Lord is destined to occur at an appointed time. Indeed, about that, those inheriting the book are gravely in doubt
42|15|Such is the case! Therefore, (oh Muhammad, SAW), invite (towards His way), and just as you have been ordered, strictly adhere to it yourself. Do not (ever) follow their wishes and whims. Say, "I believe in the books Allah has revealed. My orders are to treat you fairly. Allah is my Lord and He is your Lord too. Our deeds are for us, and for you are yours! (Let there be) no argument between you and us. Allah will gather and summon us before Him. Towards Him is our return
42|16|Some people _ (the unbelievers) _ argue about Allah with those who have heard and accepted His call. The arguments and contentions of such people are absurd according to Allah. His wrath will befall them. There exists a severe punishment for them
42|17|Allah it is, Who has revealed the Book with the truth and the balance (to weigh and check all your deeds for correctness). You just do not know! The hour (of Judgment) may be very close, right around the corner
42|18|Only the disbelievers (flippantly) ask for it _ (the hour of Judgment) _ to be hastened. The believers, however, are gravely concerned. They know it to be the absolute truth. Be sure! Those who waver and hesitate (and stay in doubt) about the hour have indeed strayed far away
42|19|Allah is Gracious to His servants. He supplies (ample) provisions to whom He wants; He is the Mighty and the Powerful
42|20|We multiply the benefits for those who want to reap the worth (of their deeds) in the afterlife. We grant the benefits in this world to those who seek the fruits of their labor, right here in this world. Then, in the afterlife they shall have nothing (left)
42|21|Do they have gods, the partners (of Allah), who enact the rites and rules of religion for them _ (rules) that are not approved by Allah? The verdict of Allah has been decreed; else their matter would certainly be brought to a close right away. For the evildoers there exists a painful punishment
42|22|(On that day), you will find the evildoers scared stiff of what they had committed (in this life); what they have committed would come crashing down on them. But those who believe and act righteously, would be in the gardens of paradise. With their Lord, they shall find everything their hearts desire. That, indeed is the greatest honor
42|23|That is the good news Allah has for His servants, those of them who believe and do the righteous deeds. Say, "For this (Qur´an,) I do not ask any compensation from you, except the kindness that kinship warrants." (Let) whoever earns good deeds (know that) We will increase the benefits (and the worth) of their good deeds. Of course, Allah is Forgiving; and He appreciates gratitude
42|24|Do they claim that he, (the messenger), has fabricated a lie about Allah? (Oh prophet)! If Allah wants, He can place a seal upon your heart! Allah wipes out the absurd, the false and futile; and He validates the truth with His words. Indeed, He is Aware of everything (including the unexpressed secrets) buried in the chest
42|25|He it is, Who (hears and) accepts His servants´ repentance. He overlooks and excuses (many of) your misdeeds; but He does know everything you do
42|26|He answers the prayers of those who believe and act righteously. In fact, by His grace He grants them far in excess (of what they seek). As for the unbelievers, theirs is the severe punishment
42|27|If Allah had provided abundance and wealth to (all) His servants, they would have become wanton and wayward! Instead, He grants what He wants in measured amounts. Indeed, He watches over His servants, and is well Aware
42|28|After people abandon and lose hope (about the rainfall), it is He Who sends rain and spreads His mercy around. Indeed, He is the Master worthy of all praise
42|29|Some of His signs: the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the life He has dispersed in the heavens and on earth. He is capable of bringing them all together, whenever He wants
42|30|Every calamity that afflicts you, is the result of what your own hands have wrought. (However), He overlooks and excuses many (of your misdeeds)
42|31|You cannot (expect to) escape and elude (Allah) on earth. Apart from Allah, you shall find no friend and no helper
42|32|And among His signs are (huge) ships, like mountains (floating) in the sea
42|33|If He wants, He can cause the winds to cease. The ships would then lie motionless on the surface of the sea. In fact, there are signs in that for every steadfast and grateful person
42|34|He can destroy (and drown) them as a result of their misdeeds, though he overlooks (and pardons) a lot
42|35|Let those who (refute and) dispute Our signs know that they have no refuge
42|36|You have really been granted (the bare essentials, and) the brief enjoyment in the life of this world. What exists with Allah is far superior, and better enduring. It exists for those who believe and place their trust in Allah
42|37|(It is for those) who stay clear away from the worst of sins and vile deeds; and when in rage, they (control their anger and) forgive
42|38|(It is for those) who respond to the call of their Lord and establish the ´salat´. They run their affairs by mutual consultation, and spend (for Our sake) out of what We have granted them
42|39|When oppressed and tyrannized, they rise up and retaliate
42|40|The recompense (or reprisal) against an evil deed is (allowed, but should be) a deed of the same kind (and no more). But the one who forgives and makes (overtures of) peace is better. His reward falls due on Allah. Of course, He does not like those who do wrong
42|41|Those who have been wronged may (choose to) exact revenge. They are not to be blamed or berated
42|42|Rather, blameworthy are those who oppress mankind and commit unjust and flagrant acts in this world. For such people there is a painful punishment
42|43|But, to bear patiently and forgive is indeed an (admirable) act of courage, and a virtue
42|44|The one whom Allah leads astray does not have, besides Him, any protection. When the evildoers see their punishment, you will find them wondering (aloud), "Is there now a possibility to return, (to rescind and recant)
42|45|There, you will find them placed before the hellfire, disgraced and demeaned. (Anxious and afraid), they would glance at it (nervously) from the edge of their eyes. At that time, the believers would say, "Indeed they are the losers! They have caused themselves, and their near ones, a great loss on the Day of Judgment." Beware! Only the evildoers will land into an everlasting torment
42|46|They shall have no friends to help them against Allah. There is no escape for the one whom Allah leads astray
42|47|Respond to the call of your Lord before the inevitable day comes to you from Allah. That day, you shall have no refuge! You will not be able to deny your doings, (or protest your punishment)
42|48|So, if they turn away (remember), We have not appointed you their keeper. Your duty is to convey (the message). Man rejoices when We let him taste (and enjoy) Our blessings, and becomes ungrateful when, as a result of his own doings, a distress afflicts him
42|49|The kingdom of the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah. He creates what He wants! He grants daughters to whom He wants, and He grants sons to whom He wants
42|50|Or, He may grant (to whom He wants) sons as well as daughters. And He may leave whomever He wants infertile and without a child. Indeed, He is Well-aware and Proficient
42|51|It is not seemly; Allah does not talk to a mortal (directly). He talks to a human (indirectly) from behind a screen, or sparks an inspiration in his mind. Or, He may send (an angel as) a messenger. With His permission, (the angel) conveys what Allah wills. Indeed, He is the most Eminent and the Wisest
42|52|Similarly, We sent a spirit _ (Angel Gibraeel) _ towards you by Our command. You knew nothing about the book, or the matters of faith. But We made this book a beacon of guidance. By it, We guide any of Our servants We want. Indeed, you are guiding them to the straight path
42|53|The path of Allah, to Whom belong everything in the heaven and on earth! Beware, all matters come before Allah (for decision)
43|1|Ha, Meem
43|2|(Allah swears) by the clear lucid book
43|3|Indeed, We have revealed this Qur´an in the Arabic language, so you may understand
43|4|It certainly comes from the master book with Us, (the source of all revelations). It is really sublime and sensible
43|5|So then, should We pass you over and hold back this Qur´an, because you are a nation guilty of excess
43|6|Many a prophet did We send to the earlier generations
43|7|No prophet ever came whom they did not mock (and deride)
43|8|So We destroyed (those nations); they were stronger and more powerful than these present day unbelievers. The examples of the earlier generations have gone by
43|9|If you were to ask them, ´Who created the heavens and the earth?´, they would most certainly respond, "The most Powerful and the most Knowledgeable has created them
43|10|The One Who set up this earth as a cradle for you! (He, Who) cut paths in the earth for you, so you may find your way
43|11|The One Who sends rain down from the sky in measured amounts! With it, We resurrect the dead land. In that (exact) manner, you too would be made to rise (from the dead)
43|12|The One Who created everything in pairs! (The One Who) created the ships and the animals that you ride
43|13|So that you may remember the favors of your Lord, as you ride the animals on their backs. When you (get aboard a ship, or) mount the animals say, "Supreme is He Who tamed these for us. We could not (otherwise) have subdued them
43|14|And we are certainly going to return to our Lord
43|15|Yet, these people assign some of His servants to be a part of Him. Indeed, man is clearly ungrateful
43|16|Out of everything He created, did He really choose for Himself daughters, while He blessed you with sons
43|17|Although, when any of them is given the news (of the birth of a daughter), _ which he so readily associates with the most Merciful _ his face darkens with gloom, and he is filled with grief
43|18|(You associate with Allah) the offspring that is brought up adorned with jewelry, and cannot assert itself during (times of) conflict (and battle)
43|19|They depict the angels, who are the servants of Allah, as female beings. At the time of the creation of angels, were they present? Their statements are being written down and they shall be questioned
43|20|They say, "We would not be worshipping the angels, unless the most Merciful, (Allah), had so desired." Little do they know anything about that! They merely indulge in conjectures
43|21|Prior to this, had We (ever) revealed to them a book (as an authority), to which they cling so adamantly
43|22|No! Rather they say, "We found our parents adhering to a particular way (of life). And now we are following their footsteps
43|23|Prior to you, the same thing happened to every single town where We sent a warner. The leaders, those living in ease and affluence, said the same thing, "We found our forefathers practicing a certain way (of life), and now we are emulating their example
43|24|Every (prophet) asked, "What if I bring you the guidance that is better than (the customs and rites) you found your forefathers observing (so rigidly)?" They replied, "We reject what (you claim) has been revealed to you
43|25|We exacted revenge from them. So observe, how (horrible) was the outcome for those who rejected
43|26|Remember, when Ibraheem said to his father and his people, "I am really fed up (and freed from the blame) of what you (continue to) worship
43|27|Other than the One Who created me, and He will guide me for sure
43|28|And Ibraheem bequeathed the enduring words (of truth) to posterity; perhaps they would repent (and return to Allah)
43|29|In fact, I let these people and their forefathers enjoy (the pleasures of) life. Now the truth (this Qur´an) has come to them, as well as the messenger explaining (everything) clearly
43|30|When (the knowledge of) the absolute reality came to them, they said, "This is magic, and surely we refuse to believe it
43|31|They ask, "Why is it that this Qur´an is not being revealed to one of the more prominent men of the two cities (Makkah And Taif)
43|32|Do they dispense the mercy of your Lord? We (alone) distribute among them the means of livelihood in the life of this world. We elevate the status of some of them over others. So that some of them may employ the services of others. (But) the blessings of your Lord are better than the wealth they amass
43|33|People might all turn into a single community (of disbelievers). Otherwise, We would have given all of them _ all those who refuse to believe in the most Merciful _ houses with the roofs made of silver, and silver stairway they could climb
43|34|(We would have given them) silver doors for their houses and thrones made of silver to recline on
43|35|And (exquisite) gold ornaments! But then, it would all be (just) a brief enjoyment of the life of this world. The afterlife with your Lord is (only) for those who (are righteous and) fear (Allah)
43|36|And We let the Shaitan become an intimate companion of anyone who remains unmindful of the remembrance of Rehman, (the most Merciful)
43|37|They turn people away from Allah, and yet they consider themselves the rightly guided
43|38|Until (finally), when one of them comes to Us, he will say (to the Shaitan, his companion in life), "Oh misery to me! I wish you and I were poles apart." What an evil despicable companion
43|39|You have committed (and wrought) evil; so today it will not benefit you (to know), that you (and your Shaitan) would be together, sharing the same punishment
43|40|(Oh Muhammad, SAW), can you then make the deaf hear (the message)? Or can you point the way to the blind? Or the one who is manifestly misguided and lost
43|41|Now, We will either take you away and then exact revenge from them
43|42|Or We would let you see that, with which We have threatened them. Of course, We have full (and unencumbered) control over them
43|43|Hold on fast to that which has been revealed to you. Of course, you are on the straight path
43|44|This Qur´an is indeed a reminder for you, and your people. Soon, all of you would be called to account for it
43|45|Ask the people, to whom We had sent Our messengers prior to you. Did We assign any god to be worshipped, other than the most Merciful (the ´Rehman´)
43|46|We had surely sent Musa with Our proofs towards the pharaoh and his chiefs. Musa said, "I am really a messenger of the Lord of the universe
43|47|As soon as Musa presented Our signs to them, they began to ridicule and mock them
43|48|We showed them many of Our signs, each greater than the last. Then, We grabbed them with a calamity. Perhaps they would turn back (to Us)
43|49|(Whenever a calamity struck them), they said to Musa, "Oh you magician! Since He has a pact with you, would you call your Lord (and seek relief) for us? (If you do), we would surely accept guidance
43|50|But when We eased away the calamity, they quickly retracted and revoked (their pact)
43|51|The pharaoh proclaimed to his nation saying, "Oh my people! Does this land of Egypt not belong to me? And does this river (Nile) not flow under my domain? Do you not recognize (that)
43|52|Am I not better than the one who is without honor and respect, and cannot articulate well
43|53|Why was He not granted gold bracelets, (and other riches)? Why did angels not accompany him as associates
43|54|Thus, he prevailed upon his nation; they obeyed him (and disparaged Musa). They were indeed a sinful people
43|55|Finally, they provoked Our wrath and We took Our revenge. We drowned them all
43|56|We made their case a precedent, and a lesson for posterity
43|57|When (Jesus) the son of Mary (i.e. his fatherless birth) is quoted as an example, your people raise a hue and cry
43|58|They say, "Are our gods better or is he _ (Jesus)?" They raise such questions merely to argue and bicker. Indeed, they are a quarrelsome belligerent people
43|59|(Jesus, son of Mary) was nothing more than Our servant. We heaped Our favors upon him and We deemed him, (and his birth), to be an eye opener and a warning for the children of Israel
43|60|(We created Jesus without a father, and) if We want We can create from you _ (the human kind) _ a generation of angels to supplant and succeed you on earth
43|61|In fact he, (and his fatherless birth), is a sign _ a proof of the hour (of Judgment). Therefore, have no doubt and obey Me! That is the straight path
43|62|Make sure Shaitan does not alienate you (from Allah); he is really a professed enemy of yours
43|63|When Jesus brought the clear proofs (from Allah), he said, "I have come to you with wisdom (the prophethood); so I may sift and settle some of the issues about which you have discord and disagreements (amongst you). So fear Allah and follow me
43|64|Indeed! Allah is my Lord; and He is your Lord, too! So worship Him (exclusively). That is the straight path
43|65|Yet, the sects (of his followers) continued to defy and bicker among themselves. So misery and a painful punishment on the day (of Judgment) is for those who do evil
43|66|Are they waiting for the hour (of Judgment) to creep up on them suddenly, when they least expect it
43|67|Except the righteous ones, all friends on that day would become each other´s enemies
43|68|(Allah will say) "Oh my servants! Today you need not fear; and you need not grieve
43|69|(Oh) those of you who had believed Our signs, and were obedient
43|70|You and your wives may (now) enter paradise; (your reward there) will make you (rapturously) happy
43|71|There, plates and glasses made of gold, (and containing delectable delights), would be passed around to them. Everything they find there would be to their heart´s desires, and which their eyes would relish. (They would be told), "You shall live here forever
43|72|You have inherited this paradise by virtue of what you used to do
43|73|(In paradise) there are plenty of (different kinds of) fruits for you to eat
43|74|And the criminal _ (the unbelievers), would surely be in the torment of hellfire, forever
43|75|Their suffering shall not be eased or allayed. There, they shall be depressed and desolate, (forever)
43|76|We were not unjust to them. Rather, they were themselves unjust (committing outrageous acts)
43|77|They will call out to (the keeper of hell), "Oh master, let your Lord finish us off!" And he will respond, "You shall definitely languish (in hell for ever)
43|78|We had surely brought you the absolute truth. But most of you loathe the truth
43|79|Did they hatch a plot (against the prophet)? Fine! We would put through Our own plan
43|80|Or do they fancy, that We failed to hear their covert and secret conversations? Of course not! Our angels who are with them are recording everything
43|81|Say, "If Rehman (the most Merciful) had a son, I would be the first to worship him
43|82|Exalted is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of the (divine) throne. (He is) far above what they attribute to Him
43|83|So let them be lost in their nonsense notions, and their play and past times, till they confront their promised day (in the court of Allah)
43|84|He it is, Who is the (only) God in the heavens, and the God on earth. He is the Wisest and the all-Knowing
43|85|Blessed is He! To Him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and everything in between. The knowledge of the hour (of resurrection) rests with Him exclusively. To Him you shall all return
43|86|The beings they invoke beside Him, lack the ability to intercede (with Him). They can (only) testify regarding that which they know for a fact
43|87|Were you to ask them, as to who created them they would surely say, "Allah!" Why then are they being fooled
43|88|(Allah knows) the words of the prophet, "Oh Lord, these are the people who do not believe
43|89|(Oh prophet)! Bear with them and say, "Peace!" Very soon they will find out
44|1|Ha, Meem
44|2|(Allah swears) by the clear lucid book
44|3|We have revealed this book on the night full of blessings. Indeed, We are placing (the human kind) on alert
44|4|On that night, all matters are decreed and decided with wisdom
44|5|(It is revealed) by Our command. Indeed, We have sent (this) message
44|6|A mercy from your Lord! He is indeed, the all-Hearing, the all-Knowing
44|7|If you want to be absolutely sure, (consider this): He is the Lord of the heavens and the earth and everything in between
44|8|There is no god but He, (the One Who) gives life and gives death. He is your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers and (your) ancient ancestors
44|9|Yet, (immersed) in doubt, they waste their time in pastimes
44|10|Watch out for the day when the sky would emit (vast volumes of) visible smoke
44|11|It would enshroud people. That is a painful punishment
44|12|(They would cry out). "Our Lord! Release us from the painful punishment. We would (now) definitely become the believers
44|13|Why this change of heart? (Earlier) the messenger had come to them, and had explained matters to them clearly. (But they rejected him)
44|14|At that time, they turned away and said, "He is a lunatic being coached by others
44|15|If We withdraw your suffering a little, you would revert to your evil ways
44|16|The day (of Judgment) is when We will strike that severe blow; We would exact a real revenge
44|17|Prior to them, We had certainly put the pharaoh and his people through a test; a noble messenger came to them
44|18|(He said), "Release the servants of Allah into my care. I am certainly the trustworthy messenger (sent) towards you
44|19|Do not exceed (the bounds), and do not deem yourselves exalted before Allah. In fact, I have brought you the clear proofs
44|20|I have sought refuge with my Lord, (Who is also) your Lord, should you stone me (to death)
44|21|If you refuse to believe, then stay away and leave me alone
44|22|Musa called his Lord, "These people are indeed the defiant criminals
44|23|(Allah said), "Along with My servants, leave (the country) by night. You would surely be pursued
44|24|Leave the sea as it is _ (parted); their entire army shall drown
44|25|(Pity)! Those who drowned left behind so many gardens and springs
44|26|Fields and magnificent palaces
44|27|(And the comfort and luxuries) _ the riches they used to relish
44|28|In this manner, We caused other nations to inherit (those riches)
44|29|And nobody _ neither the sky nor the earth _ shed any tears upon their demise; nor were they granted a respite
44|30|We certainly rescued the children of Israel from the abusive and humiliating tyranny
44|31|Of the pharaoh! Among those who exceeded the bounds and transgressed, he was indeed, one of the worst
44|32|Of course, We chose them purposely over all others
44|33|And We displayed to them Our signs. That was an obvious test for them
44|34|These people assert (so emphatically)
44|35|Our death here in this life is it _ (the end), and there is nothing (beyond). We will not be resurrected
44|36|Bring our forefathers back (to life), if you are truthful
44|37|Are they better than the people of ´Tubbah´, or those before them? We destroyed them! All of them were really criminals
44|38|We did not create the heavens and the earth and everything else just as a pastime
44|39|We did not create the heavens and the earth except with a purpose _ (and for a specified time). But most of them (just) do not understand
44|40|The scheduled time for (the resurrection of) all of them together, is the day of decision
44|41|That day, nobody would lend a bit of support to his friend or kin. Nobody shall receive any help (at all)
44|42|Except the one, upon whom Allah bestows (special) mercy! He is the Mighty, the most Merciful
44|43|The tree of ´zaqum´
44|44|Shall be the food for the sinners
44|45|Like boiling oil, it shall burn the inside of their bellies
44|46|Just as boiling water scalds
44|47|(The command would be): grab him and drag him right into the thick of the blazing fire
44|48|Then pour (the steaming hot water) over his head. The (torture and) torment of the boiling water
44|49|Taste this! (Now), aren´t you the mighty and the noble
44|50|This is exactly what you used to doubt
44|51|The righteous would live in a peaceful place, (serene and) secure
44|52|Amidst gardens and springs
44|53|Dressed in lush luxurious brocade, they shall sit facing each other
44|54|Thus shall it be! And We shall wed them to the fair females with big beautiful eyes
44|55|In paradise, they shall ask for, (and get), all sorts of sumptuous delights; (they shall live) in peace (and bliss)
44|56|There, they shall never ever face death, other than their death in the previous life; and He will spare them the punishment of the hellfire
44|57|Courtesy of your Lord, a generous favor! That indeed is the supreme success, the greatest triumph
44|58|Certainly! We have rendered this Qur´an easy for your tongue. Perhaps they would heed its message
44|59|So wait a while; they too, are waiting
45|1|Ha, Meem
45|2|The revelation of this book is from Allah, the Mighty and the Wise
45|3|For the believers, there are indeed (many) signs in the heavens and the earth
45|4|There are signs for the believing nation in the creation of their (own) selves, and the creation of the animals He has scattered (across the world)
45|5|(There are signs) in the alternation of the night and the day, and (also) in the provisions, (the rain), Allah sends down from the sky, with which He brings the land back to life after its death. And in the movement of the winds are certainly signs for any nation that ponders
45|6|These are the verses of Allah. We recite them to you, (oh prophet), with the truth. After (rejecting) Allah and His verses, what else would they believe
45|7|Misery to every sinful liar
45|8|(Misery to) the one who hears the verses of Allah being recited before him, yet acts like he has not heard them at all. Haughtily, he insists (upon his own notions). To such a one, give the news of an agonizing torment
45|9|He mocks whatever little he learns about Our verses. A humiliating punishment exists for such a one
45|10|The hellfire is their future! What they earn, (and amass in this world), would not help them at all. Those others they accept as patrons beside Allah would not help them. A tremendous torment is in store for them
45|11|This (Qur´an) is the guidance! There is an agonizing excruciating punishment for those who refuse to believe the signs of their Lord
45|12|It is Allah Who has calmed the oceans for you, in order to let the ships sail through them by His command, and so that you may seek His blessings. Perhaps you would express gratitude
45|13|And for you, He has subdued whatever is in the heavens and on earth _ everything (as a favor) from Him. In that, are certainly signs for a nation that ponders
45|14|(Oh prophet), tell those who believe, "The unbelievers do not expect the ´days of Allah´ _(the Day of Resurrection and all days after that). Overlook them, so He may compensate people in accordance with the deeds they earn
45|15|The one doing the righteous deeds, as also the one committing evil deeds, does so for his own sake. Then, towards your Lord you shall (all) return
45|16|We had certainly given the book, the wisdom and the prophethood to the children of Israel. We blessed them with the wholesome provisions (of life). We had given them precedence over the whole world
45|17|And We gave them clear instructions about every matter. It was only after (real) knowledge had come to them, that they indulged in internecine rivalry. It was (not out of ignorance but) with intent to wrong each other. Indeed, on the Day of Judgment your Lord will settle all matters of dispute between them
45|18|Then, We prescribed for you a clear way (of life) concerning (the rules and rites of) religion. So follow that, and do not give in to the whims of those who do not know
45|19|They shall not be able to help you a bit against Allah. Indeed, the evildoers are each other´s friends and patrons, and Allah is the friend of the righteous
45|20|This (Qur´an) is an insight for all mankind, the source of guidance and grace for any nation that affirms the faith
45|21|Do they think that We would treat the unbelievers committing evil deeds, in just the same manner as We treat the believers performing the righteous deeds? Should their lives and their deaths be equal? How wrong is their judgment
45|22|Allah created the heavens and the earth with justice. So that every being may receive compensation, commensurate with what it earns (in this life). No one shall be wronged
45|23|And how about the one, who takes his fancies and fantasies as his god? Allah has purposely allowed him to go astray; Allah has placed a seal upon his heart and his hearing, and has laid a (thick) veil over his eyes. Now, other than Allah, who can guide him? Do they not heed, then
45|24|They say, "There is nothing except our life in this world; here is where we die, or survive. There is nothing but fate, (just the vicissitudes of life) that destroys us." They do not have any (real) knowledge about that! They merely speculate
45|25|When Our clear unambiguous verses are read to them, they are left with no answer. By way of rebuttal they merely retort, "Bring our forefathers back to life, if you are right
45|26|Say, "Allah gives you life, and then He gives you death; and again, He will assemble you on the day of resurrection. No doubt about it! But most people do not know
45|27|The kingdom of the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah. The day the hour (of Judgment) dawns, is the day the followers of falsehood _ (the followers of absurd notions, and the vain and trivial pursuits) _ will incur a severe loss
45|28|(That day) you would see (the people of) every nation humbled and dropped on their knees. Each of them will be summoned to (look at) his book of deeds. (They would be told), "Today, you will face the results and consequences of what you used to do
45|29|This record of deeds prepared by Us speaks (for itself); and it is the precise evidence against you. Of course, We had recorded everything you used to do
45|30|There, at that time, the Lord will admit into His mercy (only) the believers _ those with righteous deeds to their credit. And that is a definite unequivocal achievement
45|31|To the unbelievers (Allah will say), "Is it not a fact, that My verses had been read to you? But you were arrogant and disdainful! You are the criminal nation
45|32|You were told that the promise of Allah is the absolute truth, and that there is no doubt about the hour (of Judgment)." But you said, "We do not know about the hour. We think it is only a belief; we are not certain
45|33|The evil of their deeds will (then) become apparent to them. That, which they (now) ridicule, (will come back to haunt them and) will surround them
45|34|They would be told, "Today, We shall spurn (and slight) you, just like you had ignored the meeting of this day. Fire shall be your abode, and you shall find no one to help you
45|35|That is because you took the verses of Allah lightly; you mocked them. The (temporary and temporal) life of this world duped and deceived you. This day (onwards), you shall not be taken out of hellfire. Nor would you be asked to apologize and atone
45|36|And all praise belongs to the Lord of the heavens, the Lord of the earth, the Lord of the (entire) universe
45|37|The glory and the grandeur in the heavens and on earth belong to Him (exclusively). He is the Almighty, the all-Wise
46|1|Ha, Meem
46|2|The revelation of this book is from Allah, the Mighty and the Wise
46|3|We did not create the heavens and the earth and all that exists between them, except with justice, for a specified time (and a specific purpose). Yet, the unbelievers have ignored the warning
46|4|Say, "Do you (ever pause to) think about the beings you worship instead of Allah? Show me if they have created anything (anywhere) on earth! Or do (you think) they have a share (of authority) in the heavens? Quote from the scriptures revealed prior to this (Qur´an) or produce any trace (or form) of knowledge (to support your claim), if you are right
46|5|Who could be more at fault, (and further removed from the truth), than the one worshipping others instead of Allah? Those others will never respond to their prayers, till the day of resurrection. They are, indeed, oblivious of the fact that they are being worshipped
46|6|(On the day of resurrection) when all mankind is assembled, these false deities would turn hostile against their worshippers, and would disown their adherents´ acts of devotion
46|7|Our clear lucid verses were read to them. But, referring to the truth as it came to them, the unbelievers said, "This is obviously a magic
46|8|Or do they say that he, (the messenger), has made it all up? Say, "If this is so, then you have no ability at all to back me against Allah! He is better aware of the rancorous remarks you utter against it, (the Qur´an). He suffices as a witness between you and me. He is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
46|9|Say, "I am neither novel nor unprecedented among the messengers. I do not know what will happen to you or me. I merely follow what is revealed to me. I am simply a clear-cut warner
46|10|When you rejected this Qur´an, did you ever pause to ponder? What if it really is from Allah? A (learned) witness amongst the Israelites declared his belief in it, while you displayed arrogance! Indeed, Allah does not guide the nation of evildoers
46|11|The unbelievers say about those who believe, "Had it been the truth, they could not have surpassed us in faith. "Since they did not gain any guidance from it (the Qur´an), the unbelievers say, "It is the same old trumped up lie
46|12|Prior to this, the book of Musa was the guide and mercy. This book, (the Qur´an) is in the Arabic language and it confirms and validates (the book of Musa). It warns those committing evil, and gives the good news to the righteous
46|13|Indeed! Those who say, "Allah is our Lord" and then stand firm (on their belief) shall have nothing to fear. Nor will they ever grieve (or be sorry)
46|14|Such are the inhabitants of paradise! They shall live there forever; their reward for what they used to do
46|15|We have made it incumbent upon man to treat his parents with kindness. His mother carried him with difficulty, and went through labor in pain. The pregnancy and weaning takes a total period of thirty months. Then when he reaches forty years of age and has attained his full strength (and potential), he says, "My Lord, instill in me the courage to be grateful for the blessings You have showered upon me and my parents. Inspire me to do good deeds _ the deeds that please You. (My Lord) make my offspring righteous. I turn to You in repentance and I am one of those who submit (to Your will)
46|16|Such are the ones! We would accept the best of their deeds, and We would overlook their faults and shortcomings. They shall be among the inhabitants of paradise. The solemn and sincere promise made to them (in the life of the world) will indeed be fulfilled
46|17|(On the other hand), there is the one who says to his parents, "Oh really, I am fed up with you two! Are you really asking me to believe that I would be restored back to life (after my death)? Generations have passed before me, (and nobody has ever come back)!" His parents invoke Allah´s help and say, "Woe unto you! Believe it! Allah´s promise is indeed the truth." But he (doesn´t listen, and) says, "These are nothing but (old) tales of people long gone
46|18|Such are the ones who deserve the doom. The decision has been decreed against them, and other jinn and humans (like them) in the generations gone by. Indeed, all of them are the losers
46|19|Based on his deeds, each one will have a different status (in paradise, and in hell), so that He may fully (and appropriately) compensate them for their deeds. No one will be wronged
46|20|The day the unbelievers are brought before the hellfire (they would be told), "You availed and squandered the good things in the life of the world. Today, you would be punished with a disgraceful torment, because you were arrogant in the land without a reason, and because you transgressed and disobeyed
46|21|And remember (Hood), the brother of a people called ´Aad´? He warned his folks who lived in (a place called) ´Aikah´. Other warners had gone by ahead of him, and had followed him (in that land). He said, "Do not worship anyone except Allah! In fact, I am afraid that a torment of a tremendous day might strike you down
46|22|They replied, "Have you come to lure us away from our gods. So, go ahead! If you are truthful, have that torment _ the one with which you threaten us _ visit us
46|23|(The messenger) said, "Indeed, the knowledge (about the time of that torment) rests with Allah alone. I conveyed to you whatever was revealed to me. But I see that you are an ignorant people
46|24|Then, as they saw the dense cloud advancing towards their valleys, they said, "This is the cloud! It will bring us (the welcome) rain." ….. "No it will not! Rather, it is that which you had asked to be hastened. Wind! In it is a painful punishment
46|25|By its Lord´s command, it will destroy everything." They were wiped out completely! Except for their ruins and dwellings, no traces of them could be seen! This is how We punish the guilty nation
46|26|We had certainly consolidated them; We had strengthened (and established) them much more than We have strengthened you. We granted them the faculties of hearing, sight and intellect. But since they used to dispute and deny the revelations of Allah, their hearing, sight and intellect did not benefit them a bit. What they used to mock (and deride), surrounded and overwhelmed them
46|27|Indeed, We have destroyed several of the towns around you; We amply explained and exhibited Our signs, so that they might come back (to the right path)
46|28|They took other beings instead of Allah _ the ones they thought would confer upon them a privileged status with Him. Why do those beings not help them (now)? In fact, those beings have now vanished. They are just some trumped up tales and lies, they had invented
46|29|And recall the time (oh Muhammad, SAW) when We turned a small group of jinn towards you to hear the Qur´an (being recited). As they came closer, they said (to each other), "Be quiet and listen attentively." When the recitation ended they went back to their people to warn them
46|30|Oh our people! We (just) listened to a book revealed after (the book of) Musa. It confirms the one (revealed) before it; and it guides towards the truth, and along the straight path
46|31|Oh our people! Respond to the one calling towards Allah, and believe in him! (Allah) will forgive your sins; and He will spare you from the painful punishment
46|32|Whoever refuses to respond to the one calling towards Allah, cannot elude Him on earth; he cannot find any friends or protectors to guard him against (Allah). Such ones are clearly lost and wayward
46|33|And do they not see that Allah it is Who created the heavens and the earth. He did not feel tired by this creation, and He is capable of giving life to the dead. Of course, He is indeed capable of doing everything
46|34|On that day as they are brought before the hellfire, the unbelievers would be asked, "Is this not the truth?" They would reply, "It is, and (we swear) by our Lord, (it is the truth). He, (the Lord) would say, "So, because you used to disbelieve, taste the torment now
46|35|So, (oh prophet), be patient! Just as (all) the determined messengers (of earlier times) had endured with patience. Concerning the unbelievers, do not be in a haste (to seek the verdict against them). On that day, they will clearly see the torment with which they are being threatened (today). It would seem to them, as if they did not stay (in the world) for more than an hour of a day. The message is conveyed! Now, who else would face destruction, if not the nation of evil doers _ the rebels
47|1|Those who disbelieve and obstruct others from the way of Allah, have really squandered their good deeds
47|2|Allah will straighten the affairs of those who believe, perform good deeds, and believe in what is revealed to Mohammed (SAW). That which is revealed, is the truth from their Lord. He will rinse their faults clean
47|3|That is because the disbelievers follow falsehood, whereas the believers follow the truth from their Lord! Thus Allah cites their examples for the people
47|4|So, when you clash with the disbelievers (in battle) slay them! If you over power them, take them prisoners and secure them well. Later when the weapons are laid down, either release them on ransom, or graciously on their own (as a favor). Allah could have exacted revenge, had He wanted; But He wants to test some of you by certain others among you. Allah will never waste the deeds of those who are slain in the way of Allah
47|5|He will soon guide them and set their affairs right
47|6|He will usher them into paradise; He has already familiarized them with it
47|7|Oh you who believe! If you help Allah, He will support you and establish you firmly in the land
47|8|And those who disbelieve Allah, fell flat on their faces! He lets their actions go astray
47|9|They dislike that which Allah has revealed! Therefore, He lets their deeds lose all their worth
47|10|Have they not moved about in the land? Do they not observe the ultimate fate of those before them? Allah annihilated them! A similar fate awaits those who do not believe
47|11|Because the believers have Allah as their Patron, while the unbelievers have no patron
47|12|Indeed, Allah will let those who believe, and perform good deeds, enter paradise; rivers run right through it! And fire shall be the abode of those who disbelieve. In this life, they eat and live out their existence like cattle
47|13|Many a town, stronger than yours that has expelled you, have We destroyed! Then they found no helpers for themselves
47|14|Can (the fate of) one following clear instructions of his Lord be similar to the one who follows his own whims and wishes? Their evil deeds have been made to appear good to them
47|15|The paradise that the pious are being promised contains rivers of water without a stink, milk the taste of which undergoes no change, wine that tastes sumptuous, and strained honey. In it, they shall have every kind of fruit! And forgiveness from their Lord! Could he (in paradise) be compared to the one who shall be in fire till eternity, and shall be served scalding hot water which will split open his intestines
47|16|Among them are those who come to hear you. But after leaving, they ask those who know, "What did he say just now?" Allah has stamped their hearts! They follow their whims and wishes
47|17|Allah increases in guidance those who accept His advice. He awards them piety
47|18|So what are they still waiting for? The hour (of Judgment)? It shall come upon them suddenly and surreptitiously. Its signs have already appeared! Where would they get their guidance once the hour has arrived
47|19|Know it! For sure, there is no god but Allah! Seek forgiveness for your sins as well as the sins of the believing men and the believing women. Allah is Aware of their movement on earth, and their places of residence
47|20|And those who believe were wondering out loud, as to why no revelation has been sent down (exhorting fighting to defend themselves)? Did you observe? When the definite order about fighting was revealed, those with diseased hearts stared at you like the one about to faint with the fear of death! So, evil is for them
47|21|Only obedience and welcome remarks are accepted, once the order is revealed. Had they stayed loyal to Allah, they would have fared better
47|22|If given authority in the land, you would disobey (Allah), spread mischief, and violate the family ties
47|23|Those are the ones Allah has cursed. He has made them go deaf, and has blinded their eyes
47|24|Have they never pondered over this Qur´an? Or do they have locks placed on their hearts
47|25|They turned away, even though the guidance itself had convinced them of its truth. Therefore, Shaitan deceived them and gave them false hope
47|26|Because they say to those who hate Allah´s revelation, "In some matters we will follow you." Allah is well-Aware of their secret conversation
47|27|Imagine when the angels will take possession of their souls, slapping their faces and their backs
47|28|Their good deeds lost their worth, because they followed that which displeases Allah, and because they dislike seeking the pleasure of Allah
47|29|Do those with diseased hearts think that Allah will never expose their weaknesses
47|30|If We want We could have you recognize them by their very faces. But you may recognize them by their features, and by the way they talk. Indeed, Allah knows all your deeds
47|31|Surely, We shall continue to test you, till We know the ones who struggle hard for Allah and remain steadfast; and We will test you in all your affairs
47|32|The disbelievers __ those who obstructed people from coming to the path of Allah, and have caused distress to His messenger, even after clear guidance had arrived __ will not harm Allah a bit! Allah will make their deeds lose all value
47|33|Oh those of you who believe! Obey Allah, and obey the messenger. Do not waste your good deeds
47|34|Allah will never forgive those who continue to disbelieve, and obstruct people from the path of Allah, right until the time they die
47|35|So, do not become lax. Continue to call towards Islam. You will be the winner! Allah will not diminish the worth of your deeds
47|36|Life in this world is nothing but fun and games! If you believe, and be pious, He will grant you your just rewards. He will not ask for your wealth
47|37|If He demands your wealth and continues to do so, you will be stingy and He will expose your weaknesses
47|38|Here you are, now. You are being invited to spend in the path of Allah. Among you are those who are stingy; he who acts stingily does so for his own self! Allah is over and above all needs. You are the paupers! If you turn away, Allah will bring in your place others, who would not be like you
48|1|Indeed, (oh Muhammad SAW), We granted you a definite victory
48|2|So Allah may forgive all your sins, the ones in the past as well as those in the future, so He may conclude His blessings upon you and may guide you on to the straight path
48|3|So Allah may award you a convincing victory
48|4|He it is, Who caused the hearts of the believers to be serene and sedate. He enhanced their faith, and added conviction to their belief. To Allah belong the forces of the heavens and the earth. Allah is well Aware and the Wisest
48|5|So He may usher the believing men and the believing women into the gardens of paradise _ rivers run right through it. They shall live there forever, and He will cleanse their sins (and correct their faults and flaws). That according to Allah, is the greatest triumph
48|6|And so He may punish the hypocrite men and the hypocrite women, and the polytheist men and the polytheist women _ those who hold the worst of beliefs about Allah. A string of evil surrounds them! Allah is furious with them. He has cursed them, and has prepared the hellfire for them. That is the evil path
48|7|The forces of the heavens and the earth belong to Allah! Allah is the Mighty, the Wisest
48|8|In fact, We have sent you, (O Muhammad, SAW) as a witness; as a harbinger of good news, and as a warner (of His wrath)
48|9|Therefore, (oh mankind!) you should believe in Allah and His messenger, respect and revere Him, and chant His praises every morning and evening
48|10|Indeed, those who took the oath of allegiance to you, (oh Muhammad, SAW), were in fact pledging their allegiance to Allah. It was actually Allah´s hand over their hand! So now, whoever violates (the pledge) does so to his own detriment. Allah will grant a generous reward to the one who (faithfully) fulfills the covenant with Him
48|11|The wandering Bedouin Arabs, those who (deliberately) lagged behind, will (no doubt) say to you, "Our assets and our families kept us busy. So pray (to Allah) for our forgiveness." With their lips they utter that which is (just) not there in their hearts. Say, "Does anyone have even the slightest ability to stop Allah, if He intends to hurt you _ or help you? Allah is well Aware of what you do
48|12|In fact, you thought that the messenger and the believers would not ever return (from their mission) to see their families, and that thought heartened you. You imagined and anticipated the worst (for them). You are a worthless wicked people
48|13|Whoever does not believe in Allah and the messenger (should be warned that), for the unbelievers We have really prepared a blazing fire
48|14|The kingdom of the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah. He pardons whom He wants and punishes whom He wants. Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Kind
48|15|Those who lagged behind will (no doubt) say, "Let us be with you when you leave for the loot (and the spoils of war)." They (actually) intend to modify the word (and the verdict) of Allah! Tell them, "You shall not accompany us now. Allah has already said so, earlier." Then, they would say, "In fact, you are discriminating against us." On the contrary, they are the ones who hardly understand anything
48|16|Say to the wandering Bedouins who had (deliberately) lagged behind earlier, "Soon you would be called into combat against a people possessing considerable martial strength and skill, unless they surrender. You shall have to face them in battle. (That would be your test)! Then, if you obey, Allah would grant you an excellent reward. Conversely, if you turn your backs like you did earlier, He would chastise you with a painful punishment
48|17|There is no blame upon the blind and the lame (those handicapped); nor upon those who are sick. (They may not heed the call to Jihad, all-out struggle for His sake). Allah will usher into the gardens of paradise _ right through which run the rivers _ all those who obey Him, and His messenger. He will punish with the painful torment anyone who turns his back
48|18|Allah was definitely well pleased with the believers when they, as they sat under the tree, pledged their allegiance to you. He knew what was in their heart, so He bestowed a comforting calm upon them. As a reward, He arranged for them a victory in the near future
48|19|They will acquire an abundance of booty. Allah is the Mighty, the Wisest
48|20|Allah has promised that you would capture a lot of booty in the future. Meanwhile, He has granted you this (victory) in advance. He restrained the hands of men _ (your enemies); He kept them from hurting you! So that it may serve as a sign for the believers; so that He may guide you on to the straight path
48|21|And (He promises you) other (bounties)! You are (as yet) not capable of achieving them. But Allah has earmarked them (for you). Allah is capable of accomplishing everything
48|22|If the unbelievers had engaged you in combat at that time, they would have turned their backs (and fled). Then, they would not have found any allies or supporters
48|23|Such is the norm, the established way of Allah, which is in force since a very long time. You shall not find any change in the established practice of Allah
48|24|It is He Who restrained their hands (and kept them) from (hurting) you. After He had caused you to triumph over them in the city of Makkah, He held your hands back (and kept you) from (hurting) them. Allah watches everything you do
48|25|It is they, the unbelievers, who prevented you from reaching the Holy mosque and prevented the animals pledged for sacrifice from reaching the site of the sacrificial slaughter. But, there were believing men and women in their midst whom you did not know. Unwittingly, you would have killed them, and unknowingly you would have suffered the sin (of having killed the believers). Therefore, Allah restrained your hands, so that He might admit into His mercy whomever He wants. Had they (the believing men and women) stood apart, We would have punished the disbelievers with the painful punishment
48|26|Right then, the unbelievers displayed arrogance; they bolstered their hearts with an ignorant and boastful zealotry. Allah conferred a comforting calm over His messenger, and the believers. He imposed upon them (the self-restraint, and) the words of piety. They were worthy of that (honor); they deserved it! Allah is well Aware of every single thing
48|27|Of course, Allah caused His messenger to witness a true vision in his dream. (It shall come true)! You would definitely, Allah willing, enter the holy mosque in peace; you would, without any fear, get your head shaved or your hair trimmed. He knows that which you do not know. Besides this one, He has arranged another victory for you in the near future
48|28|He it is, Who has sent His messenger with the guidance, and the religion of truth. So He may cause it to prevail over all (false) religions, (over all ism, and in all walks of life). Allah is a sufficient Witness
48|29|Muhammad, (SAW), is the messenger of Allah. He and his followers are tough on the unbelievers; but they are kind to each other. You see them bowing, and falling down prostrate (before Allah) seeking His favors and His acceptance. The distinctive effect of prostrating (before their Creator) is apparent on their faces. Such is their description in the Torah. About them, the Gospel quotes the parable, "It is as if the seed is sown in the field. In time it sprouts and sends up a tiny green shoot. Then, it becomes strong and stout, and stands on its stalk. It delights the sower and enrages the unbelievers." Allah promises forgiveness and a tremendous reward to those of the believers who perform the righteous deeds
49|1|Oh you who believe! Do not place yourself ahead of Allah, and His messenger. Fear Allah! Indeed Allah hears all and knows all
49|2|Oh you who believe! Do not raise your voice, (or stress your views), over that of the prophet. Do not shriek, or snap at him like you (often) do with each other; lest you might, without knowing, lose the worth of all your (good) deeds
49|3|Those who lower their voices, (and their views), in the presence of the messenger of Allah are actually the ones whose hearts Allah has inspected and approved for piety. There is forgiveness and a tremendous reward for them
49|4|Of course, most of those who call out to you from outside your chamber have no sense
49|5|Had they waited patiently till you came out to (see) them, it would have been better for them. Allah is the most Forgiving, and the most Merciful
49|6|Oh those of you who believe, if someone wicked brings you a report, investigate (and ascertain the facts). Else, you might attack a people out of ignorance, and later get to regret your actions
49|7|And beware! Amongst you is the messenger of Allah. You would certainly be in trouble, had he accepted your advice in most matters. But Allah has endeared faith to you, and He has beautified your heart with it. He aroused in you a disgust for disbelief, depravity and disobedience. Such are the ones following the right course of action
49|8|An honor from Allah, a favor! Allah is all Knowing and the Wisest
49|9|If peace breaks down between two groups of believers, and they begin to fight, (call a truce and) bring them to terms. If one of the groups is the transgressor, (all of you should) fight the group that is unjust, until it complies and returns to the commands of Allah. Once that happens, make peace between the groups fairly and equitably. Indeed Allah loves those who are just
49|10|(All) the believers are brothers. Therefore, promote peace and conciliation between two brothers; and fear Allah. Perhaps you may receive mercy
49|11|Oh you who believe! Let not one ethnic group ridicule another ethnic group. It may just be that those being mocked are actually better. Similarly, do not let (some) women deride other women, because the women being laughed at, may happen to be better. Do not defame or slander each other. Do not yell (racial, ethnic or other) slurs and epithets at each other. After entering faith, it is not right to insult others with disdainful names. Those who fail to repent and desist are really the evildoers
49|12|Oh you who believe! Avoid being overly suspicious. Some suspicions are, in fact, outright sins. Do not engage in (unwarranted) curiosity; and do not speak ill of others behind their back. Would any of you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother? (Surely) you would feel disgust (at such a thought). So fear Allah! Indeed, Allah accepts repentance and is the most Kind
49|13|Oh you people! We have certainly created you from one man, and a woman. Then We (multiplied you and) formed you into nations and tribes, (just) so you may identify and recognize each other. Indeed, according to Allah the nobler among you is (none other than) the one who fears Allah the most! Indeed, Allah is all-Knowing and well-Aware of everything
49|14|The Bedouins say, "We believe!" Tell them, "No, you do not believe! Rather say that you have submitted (to Islam). Belief has not even entered your hearts, yet!" Still if you obey Allah and His messenger, He will not take away anything at all from the reward you deserve for your deeds. Of course, Allah is the most Forgiving, and the most Merciful
49|15|The (true) believers are actually those who believe in Allah and His messenger and then do not waver (and do not entertain doubts). With their wealth and their lives, they strive for the sake of Allah. Such are truly the sincere ones
49|16|Say, "Are you trying to inform Allah about your beliefs? Allah knows everything in the heavens and on earth. Allah is well-Aware of every single thing
49|17|Because they have submitted to Islam, they boast of having done you a favor. Say, "Do not hold your (faith in) Islam to be a favor upon me. Rather, Allah has shown you a favor; He has guided you to faith, if you are truthful
49|18|Undoubtedly, Allah knows the secrets of the heavens and the earth, and Allah watches what you do
50|1|Qaf, (Allah swears) by the Glorious Qur´an
50|2|In fact, they are surprised because one of their own, (a mortal like themselves), came to them as a warner. The unbelievers said, "That is really odd
50|3|(Would we live again) after we die and become dust? Such a return (to life) is far-fetched, (a fantasy)
50|4|(Really)? We know very well everything that the earth consumes from their (dead decomposing) bodies. With Us is the book that (records and) preserves (every event)
50|5|No! In fact they rejected the truth (about the hereafter) just as soon as it came to them. So now they are perturbed and perplexed
50|6|(Isn´t life after death likely)? Did they not ever look at the sky above them? (Did they not wonder) how We made and adorned it? Lapses it does lack; it is free of flaws
50|7|And (what about) the earth? We laid out the earth, placed mountains firmly upon it, and caused all sorts of delightful plant life to proliferate on it
50|8|These are the (clues), insights and reminders for every human being, anyone turning (to Allah) in repentance
50|9|From the sky We sent down the water as (Our) blessing; and with it, We produced the gardens and the harvested grain
50|10|As also the tall date trees with their densely clustered dates
50|11|(Such is) the provision for My servants! With that water, We bring the dead land back to life. The emergence (of the dead back to life) shall happen in much the same manner
50|12|Prior to them, ( the present day unbelievers), the nation of Nooh, the people of ´Russ´, and ´Samood´ had rejected (life-after-death)
50|13|And ´Aads´, the pharaohs and the brethren of Loot
50|14|The people of ´Aikah´, and the nation of ´Tubbah´. Each of them rejected the messengers. So (My) threat became a reality
50|15|Were We not capable of bringing this creation into being the first time? Yet, they are uncertain about the new creation, ( the revival of creation)
50|16|Indeed, We have created man, and (so) We are surely aware of every thought that crosses his mind. We are closer to him than his jugular vein
50|17|(Remember)! The two sentries, (the two angels responsible for recording deeds), _ one sitting on the right (shoulder), the other on the left _ are receiving (and recording everything)
50|18|Not a word uttered by any person, escapes (the attention of) the vigilant observers _ (the angels assigned over him)
50|19|The agony (and stupor) of death will bring about the truth, "This is the very thing you used to avoid and evade
50|20|Then the trumpet shall sound, "This is the promised day _ (the day of reckoning)
50|21|Every soul will arrive accompanied by (two angels), a guard and a witness
50|22|You had certainly been unmindful of this! We have lifted the scales off your eyes. So, very sharp is your vision today
50|23|And his companion, (the escorting Angel) would declare, "This one under my custody (and his record of deeds) is ready
50|24|Hurl every stubborn unbeliever into hell
50|25|The one who forbade the good, the transgressor, the skeptic
50|26|The one who assigned a god (for worship), besides Allah. So toss him into the toughest of torment
50|27|His comrade, (the Shaitan) would submit, "Our Lord, I did not force him to transgress and rebel. He was wayward himself; quite far astray
50|28|(Allah) will say, "Refrain from quarrelling in My presence. I had certainly warned you in advance
50|29|The sentence rendered by Me shall not be reversed. I am not (at all) cruel to My servants
50|30|That day, We shall ask the hell, "Are you full?" It will reply, "Are there more
50|31|The paradise would move closer to the righteous; wouldn´t be far (at all)
50|32|This (is the coveted prize) you had been pledged! (It is) for all those who always turn to Allah in sincere repentance and (grudgingly) guard (their covenant with Allah)
50|33|(It is) for the one who feared (Allah), the most Merciful, the Unseen; (for the one who) returned to Him with a repentant heart
50|34|In peace (and bliss), enter the paradise! This is the day of eternity
50|35|There, they shall have anything they want; and yet We have more (for them)
50|36|Many nations have We destroyed (for their sins) prior to them _ nations that were stronger, (more developed) and mightier. They penetrated (and colonized many) other lands. But did they find any place to escape
50|37|Indeed, there is a lesson in it for anyone who possesses a heart (that feels); anyone who listens attentively and applies his mind
50|38|We have certainly created the heavens and the earth, and everything else between them, in six periods of time. And that did not wear Us out, the least bit
50|39|Have patience, and tolerate what they say. Chant the praises of your Lord (every day) before sunrise and before sunset
50|40|Also, chant His praises at night; and (glorify Him again) at the end of prostration (during each prayer)
50|41|Listen! The day the trumpeter calls from a nearby place
50|42|Is the day they shall hear the blast, the call of truth! That will be the day of release (from the graves)
50|43|Indeed, We (alone) bestow life, and We give death. Towards Us, is the return trip (of every soul)
50|44|That day, the earth will split open, allowing them to emerge (from their graves) in a hurry. (Carrying out) such (a feat of) gathering (of all souls) is quite easy for Us
50|45|We know quite well what they say. (You may not compel them), and you are not (appointed) a tyrant over them. With (the help of) this Qur´an. remind the one who fears (and heeds) My warning
51|1|(Allah swears) by the winds that scatter and disperse
51|2|And those that pick up a heavy load (of moisture)
51|3|Yet, glide through so easily
51|4|Then, they distribute and apportion (rain) per His command
51|5|That which you are promised, (the afterlife), is certainly the absolute truth
51|6|Indeed, the reckoning of deeds is just bound to occur
51|7|And (He swears) by the sky with orbits (of countless celestial bodies)
51|8|In fact, you (skeptics) hold (different and) diverse views (about life, death and after death)
51|9|Kept away (from the truth) is the one who has a hatred (for it)
51|10|Damned are those who conjecture
51|11|Immersed (in ignorance), they are preoccupied (by their preconceived ideas)
51|12|They ask, "When would that day of reckoning arrive
51|13|That day, they would be tormented by fire
51|14|(Here)! Taste (the outcome of) your misdeeds. This is (precisely) what you had so eagerly demanded to be hastened
51|15|(That day), those who fear (Allah) would be in (the blissful) gardens of paradise, amid springs
51|16|(Gratefully) accepting whatever (blessings) their Lord would grant them. Indeed, prior to this (in their life) they used to act righteously
51|17|They did not sleep much at night, but only a part of the time
51|18|And before dawn (late at night), they sought forgiveness (for their sins)
51|19|And (they accepted the fact that) the deprived and the destitute had a rightful share in their wealth
51|20|For those who have a firm faith, there are (convincing) signs on this earth
51|21|And even in your own selves. So then, do you not notice
51|22|In the sky is your sustenance; and that which you are being promised (the afterlife)
51|23|And (I swear) by the Lord of the heavens and the earth! It _ (the afterlife) _ is indeed an absolute reality! Just like the reality that you have the power of speech and diction
51|24|Has the story of the honored guests of Ibraheem reached you
51|25|When they came to him, they said, "Peace!" Ibraheem replied, "Peace!" Folks appear to be strangers
51|26|Then he went (inside the house) to his family, and brought back a fattened (roasted) calf
51|27|And placed it before them, then said, "Why don´t you eat
51|28|(They did not eat, and so) he felt afraid of them. They said, "Do not be afraid!" And they gave him the good news of a learned son
51|29|His wife came forward, slapped her forehead and exclaimed loudly, "(I am) old and barren
51|30|They said, "Despite that, precisely! Your Lord has said that He is the Wisest, the most Aware
51|31|(Ibraheem) said, "So what is your mission, oh you messengers
51|32|They said, "We have been sent towards a criminal nation, (the people of Loot)
51|33|To rain upon them stones of baked clay
51|34|Earmarked (especially) by your Lord for the transgressors
51|35|(But first) We evacuated from the town anyone who was a believer
51|36|There, We did not find more than a single house of the believers
51|37|In that town, We left behind (nothing except) signs for those who fear the painful punishment
51|38|And (We left signs) in (the saga of) Musa, when We sent him to the pharaoh with a distinct and definite authority
51|39|But the pharaoh relied on his might, and turned away (in arrogance); and said, "(He is) a magician, or (else he is) just plain mad
51|40|Therefore, We grabbed him and his armies and dumped them in the sea; he was damned
51|41|And (there are signs in the history of) the nation of ´Aads´, when We sent upon them the blighted lethal wind
51|42|It did not spare a thing. Whatever it touched, it (churned and) turned into dust and debris
51|43|In (the fate of) the people of ´Samood´, (there are signs)! They were told, "Enjoy yourself for just a while
51|44|They displayed contempt for the command of their Lord. So a bolt of lightning struck them, while they looked on (helplessly)
51|45|They could neither stand on their feet, nor help themselves
51|46|And prior to them, (We destroyed) the people of Nooh. They were indeed a rebellious sinful nation
51|47|With Our power and prowess, We brought into being the universe. And indeed, We expand it (steadily)
51|48|And We have spread out the earth. (Observe)! How aptly did We stretch it
51|49|We have created everything in pairs. Perhaps you would bear that in mind
51|50|(Say), "And (hurry), run towards Allah. I am really an obvious warner from Him to you
51|51|And do not assign a god (for worship), along with Allah! I´m really a clear warner from Him to you
51|52|Thus, the same was said about every messenger who came before them, "(He is) a magician! A lunatic
51|53|Do they leave this remark as a legacy (for future generations)? No! They are the defiant sinners, all of them
51|54|Turn away from them. You share no blame
51|55|But continue to remind them. Of course, the reminder (always) helps the believers
51|56|I have not created the jinn and the human kind, (for any reason) except that they should worship Me
51|57|I want no riches from them, and do not want them to feed Me
51|58|Indeed, the provider of sustenance (for all beings) is Allah, the One with absolute Power and matchless Might
51|59|Indeed! The evildoers of the present day shall have the same fate as those of their companions (in hellfire), the evil doers of the past. So, let them not ask Me to hasten (the Day of Judgment)
51|60|So, on that day of theirs, the promised day, there shall be (nothing but) misery for those who disbelieve
52|1|(Allah swears) by the mountain, Toor
52|2|And by the book inscribed
52|3|On fine parchment __ an open book, (the Qur´an), distributed (and found) all over
52|4|And (He swears) by the oft-visited house (of worship, the Kaaba in Makkah)
52|5|And the high (elevated) ceiling, (the sky)
52|6|And the surging sea
52|7|(He swears that) the punishment of your Lord shall definitely come to pass
52|8|Which absolutely no one can avert
52|9|The sky, that day, would rock and reel fiercely
52|10|Set in motion, the mountains will slide about briskly
52|11|There is misery that day for (all) those who denied (the revelation)
52|12|Those who stayed engrossed in (fruitless) pastimes
52|13|Pushed (and shoved) towards the hellfire (with disdain), they would be thrust into it with force
52|14|This is the fire you had refused to believe
52|15|(Now)! Is this magic, or don´t you see (clearly)
52|16|Burn in it! Bear it patiently, or be impatient. It is all the same for you, now! You are only being treated (strictly) in accordance with your deeds
52|17|And of course, those who feared (Allah) would be in paradise amidst blessings
52|18|Enjoying (with a relish) whatever their Lord will grant them. And their Lord will spare them the torment of the hellfire
52|19|Eat and drink, and enjoy (your reward for) what you used to do
52|20|They shall recline on thrones arranged in rows (as per their ranks). We will wed them with the lovely-eyed (heavenly) nymphs (of paradise)
52|21|(As a favor) for those who believe, We will make their offspring _ those who followed them in faith _ join them (in paradise). Not a bit shall be reduced from the reward of their deeds. Each person is held in a pledge _ (a guarantee) _ against the deeds he (or she) earns. (Good deeds alone meet the obligation)
52|22|And We shall continue to provide them such fruits and meats (in abundance), just as they please
52|23|Avidly, they shall take from each other cups of (exotic) wine (served) in paradise. It shall not cause a foolish flustered prattle, nor will it carry an offense
52|24|Dainty graceful lads would make the rounds, and wait on them. (Groomed and well-kempt) as if they were well preserved pearls
52|25|They would turn towards each other, and ask
52|26|They would say, "Earlier, living with our families, we passed our time being anxious and afraid
52|27|And Allah bestowed His favors upon us, and spared us the torment of the hot scorching wind
52|28|Indeed, (in our previous life), we used to invoke (and pray to) Him (exclusively). He is surely the Kind and the Merciful
52|29|So, (oh prophet), continue to admonish (them). By the grace of your Lord, you are not a (crystal gazing) soothsayer; and you are not a mad man
52|30|And they say, "(He is) a poet! Let us wait. An adverse turn of fortune may just do him in
52|31|Say, "Keep watching! I, too, shall watch with you
52|32|Is it (really) their intellect that instructs them (to say) this? Or are they a nation guilty of excess
52|33|Or do they say that he, (Muhammad, SAW), has composed the Qur´an himself? The fact is, they just don´t (want to) believe
52|34|If they are right, let them come up with a similar kind of composition
52|35|Did they come into being out of nothing, and without the Creator? Or were they (their own) creators
52|36|Is it they, who brought the heavens and the earth into being? The fact is they lack faith
52|37|Is it they, who possess the treasures of your Lord? Do they have a license to use those treasures with impunity
52|38|Do they have a ladder, (or a device), with which they eavesdrop and listen (to matters beyond human perception)? If so, let those who eavesdrop present a definite proof
52|39|Does He really have daughters, while you have sons
52|40|(Oh prophet), are you asking them for a fee, so they feel burdened by that liability
52|41|Or, do they have (an access to) the unseen, and are they writing it down
52|42|Or perhaps they intend to play a trick (to escape the consequences of their deeds). But those who disbelieve are going to be outwitted
52|43|Or do they have patrons (and deities) other than Allah? Exalted is Allah, far above those they associate with Him as partners
52|44|(Even) if they saw a part of the sky falling down, they would (merely) say, "(It is only) a heap of clouds
52|45|So leave them till they meet their day _ the day when they shall be struck the lightning bolts
52|46|That day, their tricks (and schemes) will not protect them a bit; nor would they receive any help
52|47|Indeed, prior to this _ (the hellfire) _ there are (also) other kinds of torments for the evildoers (in this world, and in their graves). But, most of them do not know
52|48|So wait patiently for your Lord´s decree. For, of course you are always under Our watchful eye! And sing the praises of your Lord when you wake up (in the morning)
52|49|And chant His praises in the night, too. And again when the stars (begin to) set
53|1|(Allah swears) by the star, as it sets
53|2|Your companion, (Muhammad, SAW), did not err, nor was he duped
53|3|For, he does not speak what he wishes
53|4|(Instead), it is the revelation sent to him
53|5|A mighty being has taught him
53|6|The one with strength, (the angel Gibra´eel) who manifested himself (in his true form)
53|7|At the highest horizon
53|8|He then, came closer and hovered
53|9|He was two bow-lengths away, or (even) less
53|10|Thus, he conveyed to the servant of Allah the revelation
53|11|(The prophet´s) mind did not refute what he saw
53|12|Would you then quarrel with him, concerning what he (actually) saw
53|13|And he, (Muhammad, SAW), certainly saw the angel (in his true form) another time, too
53|14|Near the farthest bound of the Lotus tree
53|15|Close by, is the abode of the (promised) paradise
53|16|The Lotus tree was veiled over by (the nameless splendor), that which covered it (entirely)
53|17|He (Muhammad, SAW) was not awe-struck, or aghast; nor did his eyes stray
53|18|He definitely saw one of the greatest signs of his Lord
53|19|Have you, (oh idolaters), considered (the reality of) ´Laat´ and ´Uzza´ _ (the false goddesses of Arabia)
53|20|And the third, the ´Manaat´ _ (the other false goddess)
53|21|(What)? the male offspring are for you, (humans) and for Him are the females
53|22|This is, of course, an unfair allocation
53|23|These are nothing but names that you and your forefathers have conjured up. Allah has not granted any sanction for it. Although guidance from their Lord has certainly come to them, yet they merely follow their (guesses and) hunches, or whatever their desires dictate
53|24|Should man have whatever he desires
53|25|But to Allah belongs the end, (the life-to-come), as well as the beginning, (the life of this world)
53|26|There are many angels in the heavens. But their intercessions would not help anyone a bit, unless Allah allows such specific mediation in favor of whomever He wills, and pleases
53|27|In fact, those who do not believe in the afterlife are actually the ones who give the angels the female names (and gender)
53|28|About this they definitely have no knowledge. They merely go by their assumptions, but when it comes to (the search for) the truth, the assumptions do not help a bit
53|29|So ignore the ones who turn away from Our reminder, and desire only the life of this world
53|30|That is the extent (and limit) of their knowledge! Indeed, your Lord knows best who has strayed from His path; and He also knows the rightly guided ones
53|31|To Allah belongs everything in the heavens and everything on earth. So that, He may punish rightfully and in accordance with their deeds, those who commit evil; and so that He may bestow the excellent rewards upon those who are righteous
53|32|If those who steer clear of the grave sins and the shameful vile deeds stumble and err, (let them remember that) Allah abounds in forgiveness. He knows you so well, ever since He created you and established you on earth, ever since you were but a germ in your mother´s belly. Therefore, do not profess purity and piety for yourself. Allah knows better the one who is pious
53|33|Did you see the one who turned away
53|34|Gave a little, then held back
53|35|Does he have the knowledge of the unseen? Can he perceive it
53|36|Does he not have any knowledge of what is (revealed) in the book of Musa
53|37|Or Ibraheem, who honored his pledge
53|38|That no one shall carry the burden of any other
53|39|That man deserves nothing, except for what he strives
53|40|That very soon, (the results of) his efforts shall become apparent
53|41|Then, he would be rewarded to the maximum extent
53|42|And that with your Lord is the conclusion (of the saga of life)
53|43|And He it is, Who makes you laugh and cry
53|44|And He it is, Who gives you death and life
53|45|And He it is, Who created (you in) pairs _ male and female
53|46|From the sperm as it is emitted
53|47|And resurrection (the birth into the afterlife) is (an obligation) upon Him
53|48|And it is He, Who grants (His provisions) in abundance, or just enough
53|49|And He is the Lord of (the star), Sirius
53|50|He destroyed the ´Aads´ of the former (era)
53|51|And the ´Samoods´! None (of the rebels) did He spare
53|52|And the nation of Nooh before them! Indeed they were wicked and wanton
53|53|And He it is, Who overturned the cities lying upside down _ (the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah)
53|54|That, which covered those cities, covered them completely
53|55|(Oh humans)! Which one of the (many) blessings of your Lord would you ignore
53|56|This (prophet) is a warner! Like the earlier warners
53|57|That day, which is destined to arrive _ (the day of resurrection) _ is approaching fast
53|58|Except Allah, no one can prevent its arrival
53|59|(Oh you who disbelieve)! Do you express amazement at this Qur´an
53|60|You laugh and do not cry
53|61|Haughtily, you hold your heads high
53|62|(Instead, you better bow down your head), fall prostrate before Allah and worship
54|1|The hour (of Judgment) draws closer. The moon split apart
54|2|When they see a clear sign, they turn away and say, "(It is) an enduring illusion
54|3|They rejected (the truth), and followed their own whims. All matters must come to conclusion (at the appointed time)
54|4|Surely, stories have come to them (from the past) with sufficient moral example to restrain them (from being arrogant)
54|5|profound wisdom (has come)! But little do warnings benefit them
54|6|(So, oh prophet), turn away from them! That day, the caller shall summon them towards an unpleasant and onerous thing
54|7|Their eyes agape in fear, they shall spring out of their graves as if they were a swarm of locusts scattered around
54|8|Rushing towards the caller, the unbelievers would say, "This is (going to be) a hard (long) day
54|9|Prior to them, the nation of Nooh had defied. They rejected Our servant, and said, "(He is) insane!" He was rebuked and repulsed
54|10|So Nooh called his Lord (saying), "I have been overcome. Send Your help
54|11|We threw open the gates of the sky, and poured down a deluge
54|12|We riddled the earth with springs. All that water sufficed to implement the preordained purpose
54|13|And We had Nooh board a ship built with planks and nails
54|14|Under Our watchful eye, it sailed. A reward for the one who was rejected
54|15|We have surely left the ark as a sign. Is anyone there to heed
54|16|(Notice) how (severe) was My punishment, and how (true) were My warnings
54|17|We have really made this Qur´an easy (to understand)! Is anyone there to heed
54|18|The people of ´Aads´ rejected. So (notice) How (severe) was My punishment and how (true) were My warnings
54|19|In fact, We hit them with violent winds, on a day of unrelenting ill luck
54|20|The winds wrested people away and knocked them around, as if they were hollowed out trunks of the date trees
54|21|See how (severe) was My punishment, and how (true) were My warnings
54|22|We have really made this Qur´an easy (to understand)! Is anyone there to heed
54|23|The (people of) Samood also rejected the warnings
54|24|And they said, "Must we follow (the advice of) a mortal being, (just) one man among us? If we did that, we would certainly go astray! (That is) sheer madness
54|25|Is the (divine) message revealed to him, (and no one else), out of all the rest of us? No, rather he is a liar with delusions of self grandeur
54|26|(The messenger replied), "Tomorrow, you would find out for sure, who is the liar and who has delusions
54|27|(We told Our messenger), "We shall send a camel to serve as a test for them. So (just) observe and put up with them patiently
54|28|And tell them that the water supply would have to be shared. It would be by turns between them (and the camel). They would (have to) approach (the site of) water only at the schedule time
54|29|Instead, they summoned their comrade who (accepted the assignment and) butchered (the camel)
54|30|And (observe) how (severe) was My punishment, and how (true) were My warnings
54|31|We hit them with (just) a single blast, and suddenly they were like dried up straw sticking out of a mud wall
54|32|We have really made this Qur´an easy (to understand). Is anyone there to heed
54|33|The nation of Loot disregarded the warning
54|34|We hit them with a hurricane (of rocks and stones). But We rescued the family of Loot in the early hours of the morning
54|35|As a blessing from Us! This is how We reward the grateful ones
54|36|Loot had definitely, (and specifically), warned them of Our gruesome Might. But they remained skeptical of Our warnings
54|37|They attempted to seduce his guests, but We blinded their eyes. "Here! Experience a taste of My torment and My warning
54|38|And early in the morning, a lasting torment had certainly come to settle on them
54|39|Experience a taste of My torment and My warning
54|40|We have really made this Qur´an easy (to understand). Is anyone there to heed
54|41|Indeed, warnings had also come to the pharaoh and his people
54|42|They rejected all Our signs. So We took them to task. We clutched them with a masterful grasp of the Mighty, the most Proficient
54|43|Are your (present day) unbelievers in any way better than those ones (in the past)? Or have you been granted immunity by the scriptures
54|44|Do they say, "We are a (well knit) group bound to prevail
54|45|Soon every group would be routed and would turn their backs (to flee)
54|46|The fact is that the hour (of Judgment) is their appointed date (with disaster). That hour is far more ruinous and wrenching, a lot more (biting and) bitter
54|47|Indeed the criminals are (lost) in error, and are (engrossed) in a frenzied state (of denying the truth)
54|48|That day, fallen flat on their faces, the criminals would be dragged into the blaze. "Here! Taste a touch of hell
54|49|Indeed, We have created every single thing in appropriate proportions (with a plan and a purpose)
54|50|Our command (and its execution) is just one, (a single event). It comes about in a flash of an eye
54|51|We have certainly destroyed many like you. So, is anyone there to heed
54|52|Whatever they do is (recorded) in their book (of deeds)
54|53|Every single matter, big or small, is committed to writing
54|54|The pious would certainly be (living) in paradise amidst its rivers
54|55|Occupying the seats of sincerity (and honor) in the presence of the Mightiest Sovereign
55|1|(Allah), the most Merciful
55|2|Taught the Qur´an
55|3|He created man
55|4|And taught him speech
55|5|The sun and the moon function (perfectly), as per their schedules
55|6|From a blade of grass to a tree, (everything) prostrates (before Allah)
55|7|He raised the sky far above, and set up a (perfect) balance
55|8|So do not transcend the balance
55|9|Administer the weight (and measure) with justice. Do not inflict a loss to others (by cheating) at the scales
55|10|And He prepared the earth for (His) created beings
55|11|It has (all sorts of) fruits, (like) the sheathed clusters of dates
55|12|Corn with leafy stalks, and aromatic plants
55|13|So, which ones of the favors of your Lord won´t you acknowledge? (For how long)
55|14|He created the human kind out of dried mud, like a potter´s clay
55|15|He created the (race of) jinn out of the (lucent) blaze of fire
55|16|So which ones of the wonders of your Lord would you disregard? (For how long)
55|17|The Lord of the two Easts! And the Lord of the two Wests
55|18|So, which of the powers and prowess of your Lord will you refuse to heed? (For how long)
55|19|He brought the two seas (of sweet and salt water) closer _ close enough to mingle
55|20|Yet, there exists a barrier between them, which they do not overrun
55|21|So which one of the wonders of your Lord would you disregard? (For how long)
55|22|Pearls and corals (are mined and) emerge from each (of the two seas)
55|23|So which one of the favors of your Lord won´t you acknowledge? (For how long)
55|24|His are the ships that sail across the ocean, as if they were (the floating) mountains
55|25|So, which one of the wonders of your Lord would you disregard? (For how long)
55|26|Every being upon the earth is mortal, (and will die)
55|27|The only One to last and live on is your Lord _ the Lord of sublime glory and honor
55|28|So which one of the power and glory of your Lord would you refuse to heed? (For how long)
55|29|Every being in the heavens and on earth entreats (and relies upon) Him (for sustenance, survival and other needs). Every single day, He assumes yet another (wondrous state of) glory
55|30|So which one of the wonders of your Lord would you disregard? (For how long)
55|31|For you, the two sin laden groups, (one of men, the other of jinn), We would soon devote Ourselves (exclusively to judge you)
55|32|So which one of the power and might of your Lord would you refuse to heed? (For how long)
55|33|Oh you, the species of jinn and humans, if (you think) you possess the means to break free from the confines of the heavens and the earth, then do so. But, you shall not, without (His) sanction
55|34|So, which of the power and prowess of your Lord would you refuse to heed? (For how long)
55|35|Blazing (fiery) fireballs, and (flaming molten) brass would be let loose upon you. Escape you shall not
55|36|So, which of the power and might of your Lord would you refuse to heed? (For how long)
55|37|And then the sky shall split asunder and turn red, just like (freshly tanned) leather
55|38|So, which one of the wonders of your Lord would you disregard? (For how long)
55|39|That day, neither humans nor jinn would (need to) be questioned concerning their sins
55|40|So, which of the power and prowess of your Lord would you refuse to heed? (For how long)
55|41|The criminals would be easily identified by their distinctive marks and mien. They would be grabbed by the lock of their hair, and their feet
55|42|So which of the power and might of your Lord would you refuse to heed? (For how long)
55|43|Here is the hell that criminals had refused to believe
55|44|To and fro, they would rotate between it and the (fiercely) hot water
55|45|So which of the power and might of your Lord would you refuse to heed? (For how long)
55|46|A twin garden (in paradise) exists (as a reward) for the one who dreads to stand before his Lord, (and His reckoning)
55|47|So, which one of the favors of your Lord won´t you acknowledge? (For how long)
55|48|With diverse wondrous things (in each)
55|49|So which one of the favors of your Lord won´t you acknowledge? (For how long)
55|50|With a couple of springs streaming across each (garden)
55|51|So which one of the favors of your Lord won´t you acknowledge? (For how long)
55|52|With two varieties of each type of fruit in each (garden)
55|53|So which one of the favors of your Lord won´t you acknowledge? (For how long)
55|54|(The righteous) would recline on (exotic) carpets lined with lush brocade. (Loaded with plentiful fruit), the branches of fruit trees would hang low, within easy reach
55|55|So which one of the favors of your Lord won´t you acknowledge? (For how long)
55|56|In these (gardens of paradise), the righteous shall have mates that are chaste-eyed and demure _ not deflowered by any human or jinn before them
55|57|So which one of the favors of your Lord won´t you acknowledge? (For how long)
55|58|(So very lovely), as if they were rubies and pearls
55|59|So which one of the favors of your Lord won´t you acknowledge? (For how long)
55|60|Do excellent deeds deserve anything except the most excellent rewards
55|61|So which one of the favors of your Lord won´t you acknowledge? (For how long)
55|62|In addition to the two (already promised), they shall have two more gardens
55|63|So which one of the favors of your Lord won´t you acknowledge? (For how long)
55|64|(With foliage) of the deepest green color
55|65|So which one of the favors of your Lord won´t you acknowledge? (For how long)
55|66|With two (constantly) gushing fountains in each (garden)
55|67|So which one of the favors of your Lord won´t you acknowledge? (For how long)
55|68|Each with (plenty of) fruits _ dates and pomegranates
55|69|So which one of the favors of your Lord won´t you acknowledge? (For how long)
55|70|There, they shall have beautiful virtuous (wives)
55|71|So which one of the favors of your Lord won´t you acknowledge? (For how long)
55|72|Lovely eyed (heavenly) nymphs (of paradise) lodged in pavilions
55|73|So which one of the favors of your Lord won´t you acknowledge? (For how long)
55|74|Whom no human or jinn had deflowered
55|75|So which one of the favors of your Lord won´t you acknowledge? (For how long)
55|76|The righteous shall recline on lush green cushion, and exquisite (exotic) carpet
55|77|So which one of the favors of your Lord won´t you acknowledge? (For how long)
55|78|Hallowed is the name of your Lord, the Lord of Might and Majesty
56|1|When that (inevitable) event, (the Day of Judgment) occurs
56|2|There shall be no one to deny the fact of its occurrence
56|3|(It will) humble some, honor others
56|4|When the earth shall be shaken up violently
56|5|And the mountains are ground up into fine particles
56|6|And scattered about as dust
56|7|(That day), you shall (all) be (divided into) three factions
56|8|The people of the right! How (fortunate) would be the people of the right
56|9|The people of the left! How (wretched) would be the people of the left
56|10|(But of course), the foremost (in righteousness, those who exceeded and excelled) would be the foremost (in honor)
56|11|They would be nearest (to Allah)
56|12|In the blissful paradise
56|13|Many (of the foremost would be) from the earlier (generations)
56|14|And fewer from the later (generations)
56|15|(They will sit) on thrones engraved with gold and precious stones
56|16|They would recline (on their thrones), facing each other
56|17|Youthful lads, who would stay young forever,would wait on them
56|18|With cups and goblets, and glasses filled (with pure wine) from the spring
56|19|It would neither cause a hangover, nor affect their senses
56|20|And (they shall have) fruits, any (kind) they choose
56|21|And the flesh of birds and fowl, whichever they fancy
56|22|And lovely-eyed nymphs (of paradise)
56|23|(So beautiful), as if they were pearls preserved in their shells
56|24|(All as) rewards for what they used to do
56|25|There, they shall not hear anything vulgar or vile
56|26|Only serene and peaceful greetings
56|27|And for the people of the right? How (fortunate) would be the people of the right
56|28|(They would be in a place) with thornless lotus trees
56|29|Clusters of Acacia _ (a tree in paradise)
56|30|Dense and defuse shade
56|31|Water pouring out (of springs constantly)
56|32|Plenty of fruits
56|33|Unforbidden and limitless
56|34|And elevated thrones
56|35|(As for their wives), We would fashion them afresh
56|36|And make them young again, vernal and virginal
56|37|Loving and devoted mates of the same age
56|38|(All this), for the people of the right
56|39|(There would be) many (of them) from the earlier (generations)
56|40|And many from the later (generations)
56|41|And the people of the left? How (wretched) would be the people of the left
56|42|(They would live) in the (blistering) hot wind, and the (boiling) hot water
56|43|Under the cover of the dark smoke
56|44|Which is neither cool nor refreshing
56|45|Prior to this, they had the life of leisure and luxury
56|46|And persisted in the greatest of sins
56|47|They used to say, "After we die and wither away into dust and bones, would we really be brought back to life
56|48|And our forefathers, too
56|49|(Tell them, oh prophet) "Indeed, all (of you) of the earlier and later times
56|50|Would certainly be gathered together at the selected place, on an appointed day
56|51|And then, oh you who went astray and rejected (the truth)
56|52|You would certainly have to eat the fruit of the tree of ´zaqqum´
56|53|And stuff yourself with it
56|54|(To flush it down), you are going to have (only) hot boiling water
56|55|Which you will drink like a thirst stricken camel
56|56|Such will be their ´reception´ on the Day of Judgment
56|57|It is We Who has created you. Why then do you not affirm the truth
56|58|Do you ever think about the semen you ejaculate
56|59|Do you turn it into a human fetus, or are We the Creator
56|60|We have decreed death for all of you, and We are not incapable
56|61|Of altering your form, and reshaping you into an altogether different existence. An existence about which you know absolutely nothing
56|62|You are certainly well aware of this (present) form of creation. So, why do you not heed
56|63|Do you ever think about the seeds you sow in the soil
56|64|Do you make them grow? Or is it We Who turns the seeds into a field full of crops
56|65|If We wish, We can convert the crop into chaff and leave you whining
56|66|(Saying), "We have really been penalized
56|67|In fact we have been deprived
56|68|Do you ever think about the water you drink
56|69|Did you bring it down from the rain clouds? Or is it We Who makes the rain come down
56|70|If We wish, We could make it brackish. So why aren´t you grateful
56|71|Do you ever think about the fire you build (from logs)
56|72|Did you bring the trees (and forests) into being? Or is it We Who causes them to be
56|73|We have made all this to remind you (of Us), and a skill (providing comfort) for those in the wilderness
56|74|So glorify and praise the name of your Supreme Lord
56|75|No, of course not! I swear by the position of the stars
56|76|And it is, indeed, a very solemn oath if you only knew
56|77|(I swear that) this (Qur´an) is certainly a noble recital
56|78|(Inscribed) in a well-guarded book
56|79|Only those who are (physically and ritually) clean, (are allowed to) touch it
56|80|(It is) a revelation from the Lord of the universe
56|81|Yet, do you shun this narrative (nonchalantly)
56|82|Do you make the denial (of the truth) your livelihood, (and respond to the blessings by rejecting the truth)
56|83|How about when (the soul of the dying) heaves up into the throat
56|84|At that time, you can do nothing but look on (helplessly)
56|85|Compared to you, We are closer to the one dying. But you cannot see
56|86|Thus, if (you think) you are not subject to reckoning, why can´t you
56|87|Return the soul back (to the dead), if you are (indeed) truthful
56|88|And if the dying person had been (the one) nearest (to Allah)
56|89|(He shall have) peace and tranquility, bounteous provisions and the blissful idyllic paradise
56|90|While if the (dying) person is among those of the right (side)
56|91|(He shall hear the greetings), "Peace be to you. (You are) among those of the right (side)
56|92|But if the deceased happens to be among those who rejected and went astray
56|93|(He shall have) the hot boiling water ´to welcome´ him
56|94|And the roasting heat of the hellfire
56|95|Indeed! That is definitely and most certainly the absolute truth
56|96|So, (oh prophet)! glorify and praise the name of the Greatest, your Supreme Lord
57|1|Whatever is in the heavens and on earth, glorifies and praises Allah. He is the Mightiest, the Wisest
57|2|The kingdom of the heavens and the earth belongs to Him. He gives life and death, and He is capable of doing everything
57|3|He is the First and the Last, the Perceptible and the Unseen. And He is well Aware of every single thing
57|4|He is the One Who created the heavens and the earth in six periods of time, then mounted the throne. He knows whatever enters the earth and whatever comes out of it, whatever comes down from heavens and whatever ascends up to it. He stays with you no matter where you happen to be. Allah watches over everything you do
57|5|The kingdom of the heavens and the earth belongs to Him. All matters are referred to Allah (for decision)
57|6|He causes the night to settle over the day, and He causes the day to rise over the night. And He is fully Aware of everything, (even the innermost thoughts) that exists in the heart
57|7|Believe in Allah and His messenger and spend out of the wealth He has entrusted (in your care). There is a great reward for those of you who believe, and spend for His sake
57|8|What´s with you? Why do you not believe in Allah? The messenger urges you to believe in your Lord; and He has already secured a pledge from you, if you really are the believers
57|9|He it is Who revealed to His servant the clear proofs, (the explicit verses of the Qur´an), in order to bring you out of darkness into light. In fact, Allah is really very Merciful and very Kind to you
57|10|What is the matter with you? Why do you not spend for the sake of Allah? The heritage of the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah! Those of you who spent and fought for the sake of Allah prior to victory (at Makkah), are not equal to others. They are far more exalted in status than those who spent and fought after (victory). Yet, Allah has promised excellent rewards to both. Allah is well Aware of what you do
57|11|Is there anyone who would advance Allah a good (high yielding) loan. He will increase it manifold and return it to you. (In addition), there is a great reward (for the lender)
57|12|That day, you will see that the light (emanating) from the believing men and women would run in front of, and to the right of them. (They would hear), "There is good news for you, to day!" (They shall have) the paradise _ rivers run right through it _ and they shall live there forever. That, in fact, is the greatest triumph
57|13|That day, the hypocrite men and women would say to the believers, "Look at us and let us borrow (and avail) a little of your light." (But) they would be told, "Turn back! Go find your own light!" Thereupon, a wall would be set in place between them and the believers. The gate (in the wall) would lock in (the believers and) the mercy and grace (of Allah) on the inside. While on the outside (of the enclosure) would be nothing but torture
57|14|They would call the believers (saying), "Were we not with you (in the life of this world)?" The believers would reply, "Of course, but you let yourself be tempted. You waited, (hesitated), and entertained doubts. Your hopes and expectations deceived (and lulled) you, until the decree arrived from Allah. The master deceiver, (the Shaitan), deceived you about Allah
57|15|And today, no ransom would be accepted from you or from those who had disbelieved. Fire is your _ and your companion´s _ abode. It is an evil end of the journey
57|16|Is it not time yet, that the hearts of the believers should stir with the mention of Allah, and the absolute truth that has come to them? Do not be like those who were given the scriptures earlier. After the passage of a long time, their hearts became hardened. Today, most of them are evildoers
57|17|You should know that Allah gives life back to the land after its death. We have already explained the signs to you. Perhaps you would understand
57|18|Indeed, there is a generous reward for the men and women who give charity, and advance a virtuous loan to Allah. He will increase it manifolds (and give them due credit)
57|19|The really honest and upright are those who believe in Allah and His messengers. According to Allah, they are the (true) witnesses. They shall have the reward and the light. While those who refute and reject Our signs are going to be the people of hell
57|20|You should know that the life of this world is (nothing but) fun and games _ merely play and pastime. (It consists of) the bragging and boasting among you about the adornments and embellishments (of your existence), and the abundance of your wealth and children. It is just like the shower of rain, which causes lush green (fields) that please the tillers. (But) later on, it dries up and you see it turn pale and become chaff. In the life-to-come, there is severe punishment (for the unbelievers), and forgiveness from Allah and His acceptance (for the believers). The life of this world is (nothing but) an illusive deception _ a brief enjoyment
57|21|Rush towards forgiveness of your Lord and the paradise (He has promised). Its expanse is like the vastness of the sky and the earth; and it has been prepared for those who believe in Allah and His messengers. That is the grace of Allah. He confers it upon whomever He wants! Allah is the Lord of great honor
57|22|No calamity (ever) strikes the earth _ or you _ that is not (already written) in the book of decrees. (Written) much earlier, before We cause the calamity to come about. That is really easy for Allah
57|23|So that you would not feel morose (and mournful) over matters that elude you. (And so that) you would not exult (and gloat) over what He grants you. (Indeed), Allah does not like the arrogant braggart
57|24|Those who are stingy, and advise others to be stingy! (Now), should anyone turn back (remember), Allah is Free of all want and Worthy of all praise
57|25|We have certainly sent Our messengers with clear proofs. We revealed to them the scriptures and the criteria (to distinguish the right from wrong), so that you may establish justice. We revealed iron (to mankind). It has considerable might and many uses for mankind. (So that) Allah may know who helps Him and His messengers without having seen (Him). Indeed, Allah is (very) Strong and Powerful
57|26|We sent Nooh and Ibraheem (as messengers), and We established the prophethood and the scriptures among their descendants. (Some) among them are rightly guided, but most of them are evildoers
57|27|Then, We had many messengers follow in their footsteps _ one after another. (Eventually), We sent , the son of Mary and gave him the Gospel. We instilled compassion and mercy in the hearts of those who followed him. (As for) the monasticism, We did not impose it on them. They invented it themselves. (By such means), they sought the acceptance and the pleasure of Allah. Yet, they did not abide by the demands of monasticism. We granted the reward to those of them who believed. Most of them, (however), are evildoers
57|28|Oh you who believe! Fear Allah and have faith in His messenger. He will grant you twice (the portion of) His mercy. He will grant you light by which you shall walk (along the straight path)! And He will grant you forgiveness! Indeed, Allah is oft-Forgiving, the most Merciful
57|29|So the people of the book may know that they do not have any control (or exclusive right) over (the distribution of) Allah´s bounties. In fact, the bounties rest in the hands of Allah, and He confers them upon whomever He wishes. Allah is the Lord of the highest honor
58|1|(Oh prophet)! Allah has certainly heard the remarks of the woman who pleaded with you concerning her husband, and directed her complaint towards Allah. And Allah has heard the discussions the two of you had. Indeed, Allah hears all and sees all
58|2|Those who (swear and) declare their wives to be like their mothers (should know that) their wives are not their mothers. Of course, their mothers can only be those who gave them birth. What they utter is certainly condemned, and a lie. Allah is indeed the most Forgiving, the most Merciful
58|3|Those who declare their wives to be like their mothers, and later wish to rescind their statement must free a slave before they may approach their wives. You are being cautioned against (making such statements). Allah is well Aware of what you do
58|4|And the one who does not find (the resources to free a slave), must observe fasts daily for two consecutive months before the couple may touch each other. He who lacks the ability to fast should feed sixty poor people. This is so you may have faith in Allah and His messenger! These are the limits set by Allah. For the unbelievers there is a painful punishment
58|5|Indeed, those who oppose Allah and His messenger are going to be disgraced, just like those before them (who opposed Allah). We have revealed clear proofs! There is a disgraceful punishment for the unbelievers
58|6|That day Allah will resurrect them all, and He will tell them everything they had done. Allah has recorded everything, while they have forgotten. Allah is the witness to every single thing
58|7|Do you not realize that Allah knows everything in the heavens and on earth? Never is there a secret conference of three, where He is not the fourth (listening in); nor of five, where He is not the sixth (listening). Even when there are less (than three) or more than that number (holding secret talks), He is (always) with them no matter where they might happen to be. Later, on the Day of Judgment, He will tell them everything they had done! Indeed, Allah knows every single thing
58|8|Have you not seen those who were forbidden from engaging in intrigues and cabals? Yet they went back to doing (exactly) what they were forbidden (to do). They conspired to commit sins and wrongful acts, and to disobey the messenger. When they visit you, they greet you in a manner in which Allah did not greet you. (Mischievously, they twist words, as they salute you). In their hearts they say, "Why does Allah not punish us for what we say?" For them, hellfire is enough! They shall burn in it! What a despicable destination
58|9|Oh those of you who believe, do not hold secret talks for the sake of committing sins and wrongful acts, and for the sake of disobeying the messenger. Rather, if you hold secret talks, let it be for (the sake of) piety and righteousness; and (above all) fear Allah, before Whom you would all be gathered
58|10|Indeed, (these) secret (esoteric) communions are the work of the devil, (whose purpose is) to dishearten the believers. (But) without the sanction (and approval) of Allah, he cannot cause a bit of harm. The believers should place their trust in Allah (exclusively)
58|11|Oh those of you who believe! Make room (for others) in the gatherings when you are asked to do so. Allah will make room for you (in the life-to-come). Get up when you are asked to rise. (In the hereafter) Allah will raise the ranks of those of you who believe, and those granted the knowledge. Allah is well-Aware of what you do
58|12|Oh those of you who believe, whenever you seek a private audience with the messenger, present something in charity (to the poor) prior to the consultation. This is better for you _ and purer. (Yet) if you are unable (to offer charity), then Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Kind
58|13|Are you afraid of giving charity prior to your consultation with the messenger? So you may not _ and Allah forgives you for it _ (but) establish ´salat´, pay the ´zakat´ and obey Allah and His messenger. Allah is (well) Aware of what you do
58|14|Do you not see the hypocrites? They befriend the nation that has invoked the wrath of Allah. They _ (such hypocrites) _ neither belong to you nor to others (your enemies). They knowingly swear to their falsehood
58|15|Allah has prepared a severe punishment for them! Indeed, what they do is really evil
58|16|They use their oaths as their shields, and they prevent people from the path of Allah. A disgraceful punishment is (in store) for them
58|17|Their wealth and their children will not help them a bit against Allah! They are the people of the fire, and in it they shall stay forever
58|18|On that day, Allah will raise them all (back to life), and they will swear before Him just like they swear before you (now). They will fancy that their oaths will bring them some benefits. Beware! They are certainly the liars
58|19|Shaitan has gained mastery over them, and has caused them to become oblivious of the remembrance of Allah. They are the gang of Shaitan. Beware! The gang of Shaitan is definitely the loser
58|20|Indeed, those who oppose Allah and His Messenger are the ones who would be the lowest and the most humiliated
58|21|Allah has decreed, "I and My messengers shall certainly prevail!" Allah is the Strongest, and the most Powerful
58|22|You will never see it happen, that folks who believe in Allah and the Day of Judgment (also) love those who oppose Allah and His messenger, even if they happen to be their fathers, sons, brothers or other relatives. Such are the believers upon whose hearts Allah has etched faith; He has bolstered their belief with His true guidance and light. He will usher them into paradise, right through which, run rivers. They will live there forever! Allah is pleased with them and they are pleased with Him. They are the party of Allah! Beware, it is (really) the party of Allah that will triumph
59|1|Everything in the heavens and the earth chants the praises of Allah! He is the most Powerful and the Wisest
59|2|It is He Who drove the disbelievers, the people of the book, from their homes at the very start of assembly (the siege against them). You never thought they would depart (without resistance). And they thought their strongholds would defend them against Allah. But Allah came upon them from where they least expected. He cast terror in their hearts, so they ruined their homes with their own hands, and the hands of the believers. So learn the lesson, Oh you, endowed with sights
59|3|Had Allah not decreed (the life of) exile for them, He would certainly have punished them in this world. The punishment by fire is (in store) for them in the afterlife
59|4|This is so, because they acted in defiance of Allah and His messenger. Whoever goes against (the will of) Allah (should know that) Allah is indeed very Severe in reprisal
59|5|It was with Allah´s permission that you cut down (some of) the date palm trees and left (others) standing on their stems, in order that He might disgrace the evildoers
59|6|Allah granted their possessions to His messenger, as spoils (of war). You did not throw your horses and your camels (in battle) against them. Allah gives dominance to His messenger over whatever He pleases. Allah is capable of (doing) everything
59|7|The booty Allah granted to His messenger from the people of the town is for (the sake of) Allah, His messenger, the relatives (of the messenger), the orphans, the poor (and the needy), and the wayfarers; so that wealth may not get (hoarded) amongst your well to do. Accept what the Messenger grants you and stay away from what he forbids! Fear Allah. Indeed, Allah is very Severe in reprisal
59|8|(The booties are) for the poor immigrants who were driven out of their homes and (deprived of) their belongings, those who seek the bounties of Allah and His pleasures. They help (the cause of) Allah and His messenger! Such are truly the faithful ones
59|9|And the booties are for those who had houses (in the city) and had accepted the faith before others. (Because) they really love the immigrants who were driven out of their homes and came to them (for help). They do not entertain any greed in their hearts for what others have been given. They prefer others over themselves, even though they are poor. Those who escape the greed within their own hearts, are really the successful ones
59|10|Those who followed them (in faith) say, "Our Lord! Grant us forgiveness and also (grant forgiveness) to our brothers who preceded us in faith. Do not put hatred in our hearts for the believers. Our Lord, you are certainly the most Forgiving and the most Kind
59|11|Did you not observe the hypocrites? They say to their disbelieving friends, the people of the scriptures, "If you are banished (from town), then we too shall depart with you. We will never listen to anyone against you. We will come to your aid if war is waged upon you." Allah bears witness that they are surely the liars
59|12|Very definitely! If they, (the people of the book), are banished, the hypocrites will not depart with them. If they, (the people of the book), are attacked, the hypocrites will not come to their aid. They (the hypocrites) will turn their backs (and desert their allies), if they (at all) come to their aid. No help shall they receive, then
59|13|Indeed, in their hearts they fear you much more than they fear Allah. This is so because they are a nation that does not comprehend
59|14|They will not unite to fight you as a single force, except in fortified villages or from behind walls. Their enmity and aversion for each other is intense. You consider them united, but their hearts are divided! This is so because they are a nation that does not understand
59|15|They are (exactly) like their immediate predecessors who tasted the evil result of their conduct. A painful punishment is (in store) for them
59|16|(The hypocrites are) like Shaitan! He suggests to man, "Refute the truth! (be ungrateful)!" But as soon as man denies the truth, (Shaitan) says, "I am absolved of your sins! Indeed, I fear Allah, the Lord of the universe
59|17|The final outcome would be: both of them _ (Shaitan the enticer, and the man accepting his suggestion) _ would be (thrown) in the fire. Both would live there forever! And that is the befitting treatment for the evildoers
59|18|Oh you who believe, fear Allah! Each one should take stock! What (kind of deeds) has he sent forth for tomorrow, (the Day of Judgment)? Fear Allah! Indeed, He is well Aware of what you do
59|19|Do not be like those who forgot Allah, and (so) He made them forget their own selves. Such indeed are the disobedient ones
59|20|The companions of fire and the dwellers of paradise are not equal. It is the dwellers of paradise, who are certainly the successful ones
59|21|Had We sent this Qur´an upon a mountain, you would have surely seen it humbled _ burst asunder and trembling with the fear of Allah. These are (but) examples We quote for (the benefit of) mankind. Perhaps they would ponder
59|22|He is Allah! There is no god except Him, the Knower of the unseen and the manifest! He is the most Beneficent and the most Merciful
59|23|He is Allah! There is no god except Him, the King, the most Holy, the Grantor of peace, the Grantor of all security, the Majestic, the Compeller, and the ever Supreme! Exalted is Allah! Far above the partners they associate with Him
59|24|He is Allah, the Creator, the Ultimate Inventor, and the Grantor of shapes and forms. The best of all names belong to Him! Everything in the heavens and on earth chants His praises! He is the Almighty and the Wisest
60|1|Oh those of you who believe, if you (really) left your homes for Me, seeking My approval, then do not accept My enemies _ and your enemies _ as friends! You show them affection, even though they have rejected the truth that came to you! They exiled the messenger _ and you, too _ because you believe in Allah, your Lord. You secretly show them affection! I know what you conceal and what you declare! Whoever amongst you does that, has really left the straight path and has gone astray
60|2|They would treat you as their enemies, if they were to gain an upper hand over you. With evil (intent) they would assault you with their hands and their tongues. They (just) love to have you disbelieve (and renounce your faith)
60|3|Your relatives and your children will not benefit you on the Day of Judgment; He will judge (all matters) between you. Allah watches everything you do
60|4|There has been an excellent example for you in Ibraheem, and those with him. They said to their people, "(We hereby declare that) we are free of all guilt concerning you, and the gods you worship other than Allah. We renounce you (and your faith). There has appeared between us hatred, and hostility forever, until you come to believe in Allah (exclusively)." Ibraheem´s remarks to his father was an exception. (He had said), "I will seek forgiveness for you from Allah. (But) I lack the authority to get anything (at all) for you from Allah." (Ibraheem turned to Allah and said), "Our Lord! Upon You we rely and towards You we turn in repentance! Towards You is our journey back
60|5|Our Lord, do not turn us into a test for the unbelievers, and forgive us our Lord! Indeed, You _ and only You _ are the Almighty, the Wisest
60|6|In them _ (Ibraheem and those with him) _ there is certainly an excellent example to follow for anyone looking forward to (the meeting with) Allah on the Last Day. And should anyone turn away, Allah is certainly Free of all want and Worthy of all praise
60|7|Perhaps Allah will (once again) cast friendship and love between you and them _ those you have alienated. Allah has power over all things! Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
60|8|Allah does not forbid you to be just and righteous towards those who did not go into battle against you (over matters of faith), and did not expel you from your homes. Deal with them justly. Allah loves those who are just
60|9|But Allah forbids you to befriend those who fought against you over matters of faith, those who either assisted others in driving you out of your homes or drove you out themselves. Those of you who befriend them are indeed the evil doers
60|10|Oh those of you who believe, investigate (all) immigrant women who come to you, claiming to be the believers. Allah knows better, whether or not they believe. If you determine that they (really) are the believers, then do not repatriate them back to their non-believing husbands (or family). The believing women are not lawful for the non-believing men; nor are the non-believing men lawful for the believing women. Return to their non-believing husbands whatever they had spent (as nuptial dowry). You would not be committing a sin, if you marry such women, provided you pay them their due. Do not keep the non-believing women married to you. Ask them to return what you had spent upon them (as nuptial dowry). Let the non-believing husbands (likewise) receive the amounts they had spent on their (believing) wives. This is the command of Allah! He judges between you; Allah is the all-Knowing, the Wisest
60|11|(Even) if any of your wives leaves you for the disbeliever (without returning the nuptial dowry) still in your turn, pay the disbelievers whose wives leave them for you (an amount) equal to what they had spent. (Always) fear Allah, in Whom you (profess to) believe
60|12|Oh prophet! Accept the pledges of the believing women, when they come to take their oaths of allegiance to you. Provided, they pledge that they would not join any partners with Allah, would not steal, commit adultery or kill their children, and would not indulge in slander, and would not concoct lies on their own. Also, that they would not disobey you in what is right. Seek forgiveness for them from Allah! Certainly Allah is the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
60|13|Oh you who believe! Do not befriend the people who have incurred the wrath of Allah. Just like the disbelievers lying in their graves, they too have abandoned all hope about the afterlife
61|1|Everything in the heavens and on earth chants His praises; He is the Mightiest, the Wisest
61|2|Oh you who believe, why do you say that which you do not (intend to) do
61|3|It is greatly despised by Allah that you should say something, and then not do it
61|4|Indeed, Allah loves those who fight in His path, organized and arrayed as if they were a single solid structure
61|5|(Remember), when Musa said to his people, "Oh my people, why do you annoy and irritate me? You already know that I am really the messenger of Allah for you!" (But) when they deviated (from the truth), Allah made their hearts turn further away (from the truth). Allah does not guide the sinful people
61|6|And (remember) when Jesus son of Mary said, "Oh children of Israel, I have really been appointed the messenger of Allah towards you. I confirm the Torah, the scriptures revealed before me, and I give you the good news of the messenger after me. His name is Ahmad." But when that messenger arrived with clear proofs, they said, "This is a clever deception
61|7|Who could be more evil than the one inventing lies about Allah, even though what he is being invited towards is (nothing but) peace! And Allah does not guide the nation of evildoers
61|8|They want to put out the light of Allah by blowing on it with their mouth. But Allah is going to complete His light _ (the guidance) _ much to the chagrin of the disbelievers
61|9|It is He Who sent His messenger with the guidance and the true religion, in order that it may prevail and triumph over all (fake) religions, much to the dislike of the idolaters
61|10|Oh you who believe! Shall I point out to you a trade that will save you from a painful punishment
61|11|Believe in Allah and His messenger, and strive in the path of Allah with your wealth and your lives. This is (certainly) better for you, if you only knew
61|12|He will forgive your sins, and usher you into the paradise, right through which run the rivers. (And He will admit you) into the excellent abodes in the eternal paradise of Eden. That is really the greatest triumph
61|13|As for that other thing you love, _ Allah´s help and victory in the near future _ give the believers the good news (of that victory)
61|14|Oh you who believe! Become the helper of Allah, like the disciples of Jesus, the son of Mary. He asked his disciples, "Who will help me for (the sake of) Allah?" They replied, "We are the helpers of Allah!" A group of the Israelites believed him, and another group rejected. Then, We assisted the believers against their enemies, so the believers prevailed
62|1|Everything in the heavens and on earth chants His praises! (He is) the King, the Holy, the Almighty and the Wisest
62|2|He it is, Who raised in an unlettered nation a messenger in their midst, the one who recites to them His verses, cleanses and purifies them, and teaches them the book and the wisdom. Prior to that, they were clearly lost and astray
62|3|(Muhammad, SAW is the messenger) also for others who have not yet joined the believers; and He (Allah) is the most Powerful and the Wisest
62|4|It is the blessing of Allah! He bestows it upon whom He wills. Allah is the Lord of the greatest honor
62|5|Those who were entrusted with the burden of the Torah but failed to bear its obligations, are actually like a jackass carrying a load of books. Worse (in fact) is the example of a nation who rejects the signs of Allah; and Allah does not guide the nation of evil doers
62|6|Say, "Oh you who became Jews, if you claim to be the friends of Allah, a people chosen (by Him) over all other nations, then wish for death if you are really truthful
62|7|They will never ever wish for death, because of what their own hands have wrought and sent forth. Allah knows the evil doers very well
62|8|Say, "Indeed, the death you flee from shall definitely come to you. Then, you would be presented before the One Who knows the unseen and the manifest; and He will tell you everything you have been doing
62|9|Oh you who believe! On Friday, when the call sounds for the (congregational) prayers, rush towards it and halt all trade (and business) activity. That is better for you, if you only knew
62|10|And spread out in the land. once the prayer concludes. Seek the bounties of Allah and remember Allah a lot, so that you would achieve success
62|11|When they see a bargain or an amusement troupe, they rush towards it and leave you standing. Say, "That, which is with Allah is better than any bargain or amusement. He is absolutely the very Best of all the providers
63|1|(Oh prophet), when the hypocrites come to you, they say, "We bear witness that you really are the messenger of Allah." Of course, Allah knows you are His messenger; (but) Allah affirms that the hypocrites are really the liars
63|2|They use their oaths as a pretext to dissuade (and deter others) from the path of Allah. What they do is indeed evil
63|3|This is so because they believed (at first), and then went back to disbelieving. (Now), their hearts have been sealed and they do not comprehend
63|4|(Oh prophet), the appearance of the hypocrites and their physiques are pleasing to look at. Their speech is so glib and pleasant, one likes to just keep on listening. It is as if they were carved out of wood and propped up (against the wall). They think (like cowards), that every call to action is against them. They are the enemies! Beware of them! May Allah curse them. How perverted are they
63|5|When it is said to them, "Come! The messenger of Allah will seek forgiveness for you", they turn their heads away. You find them looking away in arrogance (and disdain)
63|6|It makes no difference whether you seek forgiveness for them or not. Allah will never forgive them. Indeed Allah never guides the nation of evildoers
63|7|They are the ones who say, "Do not spend anything on the companions of Allah´s messenger. (Wait) till they desert him." (All) the treasures of the heavens and the earth belong to Allah. But the hypocrites do not understand
63|8|They (the hypocrites) say, "When we return to town, the one with respect and honor will expel the despised (and humbled)." The respect and honor belong (entirely) to Allah, His messenger, and the believers. But the hypocrites do not know
63|9|Oh those of you who believe! Do not let your wealth and your children divert you away from the remembrance of Allah. Anyone doing that would indeed be the loser
63|10|Spend (in charity), out of what We have granted you, lest death comes to any of you and (remorsefully) he says, "My Lord, if only you grant me an extension, (a little more time), I would give (my wealth in) charity; and I would be righteous
63|11|Allah never extends (the life) for anyone, past his time. Allah is well Aware of what you do
64|1|Everything in the heavens and on earth chants the praises of Allah. To him belongs the empire! To him belongs all praise (and all gratitude)! He has power over all things
64|2|It is He Who created you. (Yet), among you are those who deny (the truth); and some of you believe. Allah watches everything you do
64|3|He created the heavens and the earth (based) on the truth. He gave you form, the most excellent (the best possible) form; and towards Him is your journey back
64|4|He knows everything in the heavens and on earth. He knows what you conceal, and what you declare. He has full knowledge of everything _ (all the emotions, intentions and thoughts) _ that exists in the hearts
64|5|Have you not heard the tales of those who denied earlier? They tasted the evil consequences of their conduct. There is, (in addition), a painful punishment (in store) for them
64|6|Allah´s messengers came to them with clear proofs. Yet, they (denied and) said, "Will (fallible) humans guide us now?" They rejected and turned away. Allah (in His Own right) is Free from all needs, and is Worthy of all praise
64|7|The unbelievers claim they will never be brought back to life (for reckoning). Say, "Of course you will! My Lord will definitely raise you (back to life). Then, He will certainly tell you what you had done. That is (really) easy for Allah to do
64|8|Therefore, believe in Allah and His messenger; and the light (of revelation) which We have sent down. Allah is well Aware of what you do
64|9|The day of gathering _ that day when He will gather all of you together _ will be the day of loss and gain, (the day of reparation and redress of wrongful deeds). He (Allah) will remove (and cleanse) the shortcomings (and sins) of the one who believes in Allah, and does righteous acts. He will admit such a person into paradise to live forever; rivers run right through it. That is the greatest success
64|10|(While) those who disbelieve and deny Our signs, shall really be the companions of fire. They will live there forever! It is a despicable destination
64|11|Unless it is with the (will and) permission of Allah, no calamity can ever strike (anyone). Allah guides (and soothes) the heart of the one who believes in Him. Allah is well-Aware of every single thing
64|12|Obey Allah, and obey His messenger! (Bear this in mind) if you turn away, (that the responsibility) upon our messenger is (nothing more than) to convey the message clearly and plainly
64|13|Allah! There is no god except He! The believers should place their trust in Allah
64|14|Oh those of you who believe! Your enemies are (likely to be) among your spouses and your children. Beware of them! If you forego, forbear and forgive, (you will find that) Allah is indeed the most Forgiving and the most Merciful
64|15|In reality, your wealth and your children are a trial (for you). There exists with Allah, a tremendous tribute (at the end of the trial)
64|16|(Practice righteousness and restraint), and fear Allah as much as you can. Listen and obey, and give charity. It is for your own good. The successful ones are really those who escape the greed within their own selves
64|17|If you advance Allah a sincere loan, He will multiply it and return it to you twofold; and (in addition) He will grant you forgiveness. Allah is the most Forbearing; He appreciates (and rewards) gratitude
64|18|(He is) the Knower of the unseen and the manifest, the Almighty, the Wisest
65|1|Oh prophet, (and Oh you believers)! If you (must) divorce your women, divorce them for a (prescribed) period. Count the period (correctly). Fear Allah, your Lord, and do not _ unless they have committed a flagrantly immoral act _ expel your divorced women out of their homes. The women too should not leave their homes. These are the confines of Allah. Anyone overstepping the limits of Allah actually commits an outrage upon himself. You do not know! (During that period), Allah may well bring about something (to cause reconciliation between the husband and wife)
65|2|At the end of the (prescribed) period, either hold back your women (in wedlock) lawfully, according to the well-known (prescribed) manner, or make the divorce final in accordance with the well known (prescribed) way. Take two of your fair minded (and respected) men as your witnesses. (Oh witnesses)! Bear the witness truthfully for the sake of Allah! Those who believe in Allah, and the life-to-come, are hereby being asked to heed. Allah will provide a way out for the one who fears Him
65|3|And, He would grant the bounties (and provisions) from sources they had not expected (or even imagined). Allah is sufficient for anyone who places his trust in Him. (Always, and without an exception), Allah brings His decrees to destiny. Indeed, Allah it is Who has appointed the destiny for every single thing
65|4|(Remember), if you are in doubt about the ´iddat.´ of your women, _ either because they are past the age, or haven´t yet started to menstruate _ it lasts three months. The ´iddat´ for the pregnant women (is three months, or it) lasts till the termination of pregnancy. (iddat: the period after divorce during which a woman is forbidden to remarry). Allah (grants a leeway and) makes matters easy for the one who fears Him
65|5|This is the commandment of Allah; He has revealed it to you. Whoever fears Him (and practices righteousness and restraint), Allah will cleanse him of his sins (and rid him of his faults and flaws); and Allah will magnify his rewards
65|6|(During the period of ´iddat´) have the (divorced) women live where you live, as your resources allow. Do not abuse and mistreat them, in order to harass them. If they happen to be carrying (your) child, then spend and bear their expenses till they carry their pregnancies to term. If they are nursing (your child), then compensate them in a fair and equitable manner. Settle the issue (of compensation) between you and your (former) wives amicably. Should the matter (of compensation) be difficult (and hard to resolve), then any other woman may nurse the child
65|7|Let the well-to-do spend according to his means, and let the one with limited resources spend according to what Allah has granted him. Never does Allah obligate anyone in excess of what He has granted him. Allah may soon change the difficult circumstances into (leisure and) comfort
65|8|So many communities (in the past) have been insolent and arrogant towards the commandments of their Lord, and His messengers. So, very harshly We called them to account. We inflicted upon them a severe punishment
65|9|They tasted the evil consequences of their conduct. The final outcome of their conduct was (nothing but) sheer loss
65|10|For them, Allah has prepared the severest (most awful) punishment. So fear Allah, oh you endowed with reason and intellect; and (oh) those (of you) who believe! Allah has sent you a reminder (and an admonition)
65|11|A messenger recites for you the clear and unambiguous verses of Allah! So that he, (the messenger), may bring out of darkness into light, those who believe and act righteously. Allah will usher into paradise _ rivers run right through it _ anyone who believes in Him and performs righteous deeds. There, he will live forever and ever. (There), Allah has (kept in store) excellent (and everlasting) bounties for him
65|12|Allah has created the seven heavens. And the same goes for the earth! The commands (of Allah) prevail over all of them (constantly). So that you may know (for sure), that Allah is capable of doing everything; and that Allah has (full and unabridged) knowledge of every single thing
66|1|Oh prophet! Why did you, in order to please your wives, forbid yourself that which Allah has deemed lawful for you? Allah is all-Forgiving, the most Merciful
66|2|Allah has prescribed a procedure for you to expiate (and rescind) such oaths. Allah is your Patron; He is the most Knowledgeable, the Wisest
66|3|(Remember)! The prophet confided in one of his wives concerning a certain matter. When she divulged (the information) to another one (of his wives), Allah informed the prophet about it. The prophet told his wife a portion (of what Allah had informed him) and ignored the rest. When he told her about it, she asked, "Who told you about this?" He replied, "The One Who knows all and is the most Aware has told me
66|4|(Oh wives of the prophet), the two of you better turn to Allah and repent. Your hearts have wandered off the right path. But if you back each other against the prophet, then (beware)! Allah is certainly his friend! And so are the angel Gibraeel, and all the righteous believers. Besides that, all the angels are his supporters
66|5|In case the prophet divorces you all, his Lord would perhaps grant him other wives _ widows or maidens, in your place. They would be better than you, more obedient, believing, pious, penitent and fond of fasting
66|6|Oh you who believe, save yourselves and your families from the fire. Humans and stones are its fuel! Burly and rigidly fierce angels are (appointed as guards) over it. They do not disobey or disregard any of the commands of Allah. (Rather), they (diligently) carry out whatever they are commanded
66|7|Oh you unbelievers! Do not make excuses today. You are being punished only for what you have (actually) done (and nothing else)
66|8|Oh you believers! Turn to Allah in repentance, an earnest (and heartfelt) repentance. Allah, your Lord, may just rid you of your sins (and your faults and flaws); He will usher you into paradise, through which run the rivers. Allah will not let the prophet and those who believe in him, be humiliated on that day. The light (emanating from them) would run in front of, and to the right of them. They shall call out, "Our Lord, (please) complete for us our light, and forgive us. Indeed, You have power over all things
66|9|Oh prophet! Wage a relentless struggle against the unbelievers, and the hypocrites. Be stern against them (and do not yield). Hell shall be their abode! What an evil (despicable) destination
66|10|For the unbelievers, Allah cites the case of the wives of the prophets ´Nooh´ and ´Loot´. They were married to two of Our most honorable and righteous servants. But they betrayed their husbands, and so their husbands could not help them against Allah at all. Both of these women were ordered to enter the hellfire just like all the others who (deserved to enter hell, and) would live there for ever
66|11|And for the believers. Allah cites the example of the pharaoh´s wife. She said, "Lord, (please) build me a house in paradise under your (auspicious) care. Save me from the pharaoh and his (evil) deeds, and save me from (such) an unjust nation
66|12|(And the example of) Mary, a daughter Imran, who had (rigidly) guarded her chastity. We breathed Our spirit into her. Thus, she gave credence (and bore witness) to the words of her Lord and His scriptures. She was (truly) among the obedient ones
67|1|Blessed is the One Who holds in his hand the kingdom (of the heavens and the earth). He is capable of accomplishing everything
67|2|(Blessed is) the One Who created the death and life, so He may try and test you; which of you performs the better deeds. He is the most Powerful, and the most Kind
67|3|The One Who created seven tiers of heavens, one atop another! You do not find any disparity or disharmony in the creation of Rehman, (the most Merciful). Cast another look! Do you find any breach (in the heavens)
67|4|(Go ahead)! Look again and again. Your eyes would wear out, and your sight would (wander and) return to you, bewildered and in vain
67|5|We have embellished the heaven nearest to this world with (numerous) lamps (the stars). We have made this heaven (a means) to bombard the Shaitan with missiles, to drive them away. For them, We have prepared a punishment by the blazing fire
67|6|There exists a punishment of hell for those who refuse to believe in their Lord. Theirs is a despicable destination
67|7|As they are hurled into hell, they would hear it shriek and scream (in anger); it would boil over furiously, as it blazes
67|8|It would almost explode in its frenzied fury. As a fresh crop (of sinners) is flung into hell, its warden would ask, "(How did you end up here)? Hadn´t a warner come to you
67|9|They would reply, "Yes! A warner had indeed come to us, but (alas)! We rejected him and said: "Allah has revealed nothing! You have just (blundered and) slumped into a grave error
67|10|They would say, "Had we listened (attentively), or applied our mind, we would have escaped being the inmates of the blazing fire
67|11|Thus, they would confess their sins; damned are the inmates of the fiery flames
67|12|Forgiveness and a rich reward exists for those who fear their Lord, though they do not see Him
67|13|(Little does it matter whether you) whisper your words in secret, or shout them out aloud! He is indeed aware of everything, (every thought) that passes through the heart
67|14|Why would He not know? He is the Creator! He is the all-Knowing, well Aware of every subtle detail
67|15|He it is, Who subdued the earth for you (and made it a comfortable and controllable habitat). So move along its surface and eat the food provided by Him. But (remember), towards Him is your (revival and) resurrection
67|16|Are you unafraid that He, the One in heavens (Allah), will not let the earth swallow you? That it will not suddenly begin to rock (as in an earthquake)
67|17|Are you unafraid that He _the One in heaven, (Allah) _will not unleash a violent hurricane upon you? Then you would learn in a hurry how (true and terrible) was My warning
67|18|Of course, (most of) their predecessors had (also) refused to believe. So (observe), how (devastating) was My wrath (and punishment)
67|19|Do they not look at the birds above them? They flap and fold their wings (and fly)! No one but Rehman, (the Merciful), holds them up (in mid air). Indeed He is the One watching over every single thing
67|20|Do you have an army that can support you against the Merciful (Lord)? In fact, the unbelievers are just duped by a delusion
67|21|If He withholds His bounties from you, do you have anyone else who could grant you the provisions? The fact is, they hide behind their pride, and their (irrational) aversion (to the truth)
67|22|So who (do you think) is better guided? The one crawling on his face groping (to find his way), or the one walking upright along the straight path
67|23|Say, "It is He Who brought you into being, and conferred upon you (the faculties of) hearing, sight and reasoning. Seldom do you express gratitude
67|24|Say, "It is He Who has spread you across the earth; and (in the end) you would be summoned back to Him
67|25|They say, "When will that promise come to be, if you are truthful
67|26|Say, "That knowledge lies solely with Allah; in fact I am simply a warner
67|27|Actually, the faces of the unbelievers would distort (with horror) when they witness the torment in close proximity. They would be told "(this is the promise), this is what you had called for
67|28|Say, "Have you thought it over? Regardless of whether Allah destroys me and my companions, or shows us His mercy, (the question before you should be) who will shelter the unbelievers from the painful punishment
67|29|Say, "He is Rehman, (the most Merciful). We believe in Him! And in Him we trust. Very soon, you will find out who has committed the obvious (and the gravest) blunder
67|30|Say, "Have you thought it over? Should (all) your (drinking) water sink underground (and disappear), who can supply you with springs and clean running water (to drink)
68|1|Nun! (Allah swears by) the pen and whatever they, (the angels), write
68|2|(Oh prophet), you are not, by the grace of your Lord, a mad man
68|3|In fact, you certainly have a perpetual and ever lasting reward (with your Lord)
68|4|Indeed, you certainly bear the highest moral character
68|5|Soon you will see, and so shall they
68|6|Who is deranged _ (you or they)
68|7|Indeed, your Lord knows well who has strayed from His path; and He (also) knows those who are the rightly guided
68|8|Do not yield to those who have denied the truth
68|9|They would love it if you make concessions (and compromise the truth somewhat). They too, would then give in (some)
68|10|And do not obey the contemptible oath-monger
68|11|The abusive mudslinger, who throws insults around (all the time)
68|12|The one who prohibits the good, trespasses and defiantly indulges in sinful acts
68|13|Ignoble and greedy, in short, despised
68|14|(He acts that way), because he is wealthy and has (many) children
68|15|When Our verses are recited to him, he remarks, "(Legends)! Tales of the earlier folks
68|16|Very soon, We will (burn and) brand his snout
68|17|Indeed, We have put them through a test, just as We tested the owners of an orchard. They swore to pick its fruit the next morning
68|18|They allowed no exception, (They did not say, "If Allah pleases)
68|19|So, while they slept, a calamity from their Lord visited that orchard (and destroyed it completely)
68|20|By the morning, it looked bare, as if it had already been picked clean
68|21|At daybreak they called each other
68|22|Proceed to your field early in the morning, if you want to pick the fruit (today)
68|23|So they departed, muttering to each other
68|24|Today, do not let the poor and the needy enter the orchard and pester you (for alms)
68|25|With that resolve, and certain (in their minds) that they had the means (to harvest), they left in the morning
68|26|When they saw their orchard, they (failed to recognize it, and) cried out, "We have surely lost our way
68|27|No! Rather, we have been deprived
68|28|The moderate one among them said, "Did I not tell you? Why did you not chant (your Lord´s) praises
68|29|They said, "Exalted is our Lord. In fact, we were the wrongdoers
68|30|Then they turned around, and began blaming each other
68|31|They said, "Indeed, we had certainly acted arrogantly
68|32|Hopefully, our Lord will grant us something better in its place. Of course, we do turn to our Lord for forgiveness
68|33|Such is the punishment (in this life), but the torment of the afterlife is far greater, if they only knew
68|34|For the righteous, there exist with their Lord the blessings filled gardens
68|35|Are We to treat the obedient ones the same as the criminals
68|36|What is wrong with you? How do you draw your conclusions
68|37|Or did you learn it from your scriptures
68|38|That you shall have whatever you prefer
68|39|Or, do you hold a binding contract over Us till the day of Resurrection, (guaranteeing) that whatever you order shall be yours
68|40|Ask them. Who amongst them can claim that
68|41|Or, do they have (other gods as Allah´s) partners (offering them such a guarantee)? Let them produce these partners if they are truthful
68|42|They would be asked to prostrate (before Allah) on that day when the reality is laid bare. But (that day), they shall find themselves unable (to prostrate)
68|43|Downcast would be their eyes (in shame); disgrace shall overwhelm them. They were asked to prostrate in this life, when they were sound and solid
68|44|So let Me handle (all) those who reject this Qur´an. Gradually, We would lead them (into Hell), by means they would seldom perceive
68|45|I will let them have a little respite. My scheme is a cinch _ (airtight and foolproof)
68|46|Or, do you ask them for a fee (or a reward)? Are they laboring under the burden (of such a demand)
68|47|Or, do they have the knowledge of the unseen so they may write (their own fate)
68|48|So, wait patiently for your Lord´s decree. Do not act like the man of the fish, (the prophet Jonah), when he called (his Lord), choked with grief
68|49|(In the fish he would still be), had the mercy of your Lord not reached him. He was tossed on the bare (and barren) beach _ censured (and chastised)
68|50|Eventually, his Lord chose him and placed him among the righteous ones
68|51|The unbelievers look at you with aversion (and animosity), and they almost trip you up with their eyes. They hear this reminder, the Qur´an, and say, "He is really a man possessed
68|52|Although it is (nothing but) a reminder for the whole world
69|1|The Reality
69|2|And what is (that inevitable) Reality
69|3|What do you understand by the ´Reality´
69|4|The ´Samoods´ and the ´Aads´ denied the (impending) calamity of sudden onset _ (the hour of Judgment)
69|5|So the Samoods were wiped out by the lightning (and the thunderbolt)
69|6|While the ´Aads´ were destroyed by the violent howling winds
69|7|For seven hideous days and eight gruesome nights, He let the winds ravage them. (Had you been there), you could see their bodies tossed about (and strewn around), as if they were the hollowed out trunks of the date trees
69|8|Do you see any of them around, anymore
69|9|The pharaoh, and those before him _ the overturned cities (of Sodom and Gomorrah) _ committed the (very same) crime
69|10|They defied the messengers of their Lord, and so He seized (and squeezed) them into a tight grip
69|11|Indeed, (oh believers, during the great deluge of Nooh) when the water began to inundate, We carried you (and kept you afloat) aboard a ship
69|12|So as to make it a memorable event for you; so that the attentive souls may retain an indelible memory of that event in their (subconscious) mind
69|13|As (soon as) the trumpet sounds for the first time
69|14|The earth and the mountains would be dislodged and crushed with a single blow
69|15|And so, on that day the inevitable (event) would come to pass
69|16|Feeble and frail, on that day the sky shall burst asunder
69|17|The angels would be present there, at the edge (of the throne). Eight of them would carry your Lord´s throne above them
69|18|That shall be the day you are presented before Him (with all your secrets bared); none of your intimate secrets shall remain unexposed
69|19|Then, the one who is given his record (of deeds) in his right hand would say, (excitedly to others), "Here, take (a look)! Read the record (of my deeds)
69|20|I really did believe that (one day), I would have to face the reckoning
69|21|So, he shall have a pleasant and blissful (ever lasting) life
69|22|In the exalted (gardens of delight)
69|23|With its cluster of fruit (drooping low), within easy reach
69|24|(Enjoy)! Eat and drink (and relish your reward), the result of the deeds you had earned in the life gone by
69|25|While he, who is given his record (of deeds) in his left hand would (lament and) say, "I wish I had never been given my record
69|26|I wish I had never known (the contents of) my record
69|27|I wish my death (in the world) had been final (and decisive)
69|28|My wealth (and possessions) did not help me
69|29|And my (talents and) faculties have (waned and) gone
69|30|(The command will sound), "Grab him and tie him down
69|31|And roast him over the blazing fire
69|32|Then shackle him securely with iron chains, seventy yards long
69|33|He did not believe in Allah, the Almighty, the Greatest
69|34|Nor did he ever encourage the feeding of the needy (and the hungry)
69|35|Today, he has no friends here
69|36|And to eat, he only has the filthy discharge from wounds
69|37|Which no one except the sinners have to eat
69|38|No! Absolutely not! I swear by all that you see
69|39|As well as that which you do not
69|40|It, (the Qur´an), is the word of the noble messenger
69|41|(Certainly)! it is not the word of a poet. Little do you believe
69|42|Nor is it the word of a fortuneteller. Seldom do you ponder
69|43|It is the revelation from the Lord of the universe
69|44|Had he (the prophet) purported (and fabricated) lies about Us
69|45|We would have seized him by his right hand
69|46|And would have cut off his main vein
69|47|(Absolutely) no one among you could have kept Us away from him
69|48|It is certainly a reminder for the righteous
69|49|Of course We know, that among you are those who disbelieve
69|50|Thus, this Qur´an will definitely be the source of anguish for the disbelievers
69|51|It is the veritable truth _ (a statement of absolute certainty)
69|52|So glorify the name of the Almighty, your Lord
70|1|The skeptics ask about the torment that is bound to land
70|2|Upon the unbelievers! Nothing can ward it off
70|3|(It is) from Allah, the Lord of the means of ascent (to the heavens)
70|4|The angels and the spirits rise up towards Him during a day that spans fifty thousand years
70|5|So endure (all adversity) with grace and patience
70|6|Indeed, they consider the punishment to be far in the future
70|7|While We see it close at hand
70|8|The sky that day, will be like molten copper
70|9|And the mountains like the fluffy tufts of wool
70|10|Even the closest friends would fail to inquire about (the welfare of) their close friends
70|11|Although, they would see each other! The criminal, that day, would like to escape punishment by offering his own son as ransom
70|12|His wife and his brother
70|13|And (all) relatives _ (even those) who had sheltered him (through the years)
70|14|In fact, (he would be ready to offer as ransom) every single soul on earth, if he could (in return) save himself
70|15|No! Of course not! It is a blazing inferno
70|16|And it will scald away the scalps (of the unbelievers)
70|17|It will summon (by name), all those who turned their backs and ran away (from the truth)
70|18|And amassed (wealth), and hoarded it
70|19|Indeed, man is created impatient (and fretful)
70|20|He (frets and) panics in the face of adversity
70|21|And acts niggardly when he encounters good fortune
70|22|Except those who perform ´salat´
70|23|(Successful are) those who are steadfast (prompt, and punctual) in their ´salat´
70|24|Those who accept a due share in their wealth
70|25|For people seeking (alms), and for the deprived
70|26|(Successful are) those who believe in the Day of Judgment
70|27|Those who were fearful of the torment inflicted by their Lord
70|28|Indeed, None may feel (wholly) secure and indifferent to the torment of their Lord
70|29|(Successful are) those who rein in their sexuality
70|30|Except with their spouses _ those whom their right hands possess; because then, they are not blameworthy
70|31|While those seeking anything beyond that are really the transgressors
70|32|(Successful are) those who discharged their trusts faithfully, and honor their pledges
70|33|And when they bear witness, they stand firm (and are truthful)
70|34|Those who perform their ´salat´ devotedly and diligently
70|35|Such (righteous) ones would be honored in paradise
70|36|So what is wrong with the unbelievers? Why do they run towards you
70|37|(They are ever so ready to denounce you) in groups, on the right and on the left
70|38|Does every man among them aspire to enter the blessings filled paradise
70|39|No, of course not! We have created them out of (base) matter that they know (and are familiar with)
70|40|Certainly not! I swear by the Lord of the easts and the wests, that We are indeed capable
70|41|Of replacing them with (other creations) better than them. We shall certainly not be surpassed
70|42|So let them stay engrossed in their idle talks and their games, until they come to face their promised day
70|43|That day they would rush out of their graves fast, as if they were hurrying towards their goal
70|44|Their eyes shall be down cast (with shame). Humiliation and disgrace shall overwhelm them (completely). They are being promised (just) such a day
71|1|Indeed, We sent Nooh towards his people (and said to him), "Warn your people before (it is too late, and) a painful punishment befalls them
71|2|He said, "Oh my people, I am obviously a messenger towards you
71|3|(With a message) that you should worship Allah (exclusively); you should fear Him, and obey me
71|4|He will forgive your sins and grant you respite for a specified time. Indeed, once that time arrives, the decree of Allah cannot be delayed. If you only knew
71|5|He said, "My Lord, I have invited my nation (towards the truth) day and night
71|6|But my calls have only increased their hatred (for the truth)
71|7|In fact, whenever I call them (to say) that You might forgive them, they stick their fingers in their ears. They (hide their faces and) wrap their clothes around them (in defiance). They grew obstinate and became (rude and insulting, and) increasingly arrogant
71|8|Indeed, I even preached to them in public
71|9|Indeed, I (not only) declared (and conveyed the message) to them in public, (but) I even reasoned with them in private
71|10|I said, ´seek forgiveness from your Lord. Indeed, He is Oft-Forgiving!´
71|11|He will send abundant rain for you from the sky
71|12|He will help you and cause you to increase in wealth and offspring. He will grant you gardens. He will cause rivers to flow (in your land)
71|13|What is the matter with you? Why do you not expect (and anticipate) dignity from Allah
71|14|He has created you in stages
71|15|Do you not see how Allah has created the seven heavens in tiers
71|16|In the heavens, He created the moon to be (a soft) light, (while) He set the sun up as a lamp _ (a source of light)
71|17|It is Allah Who (created you from the earth´s elements; as it were, He) caused you to sprout from the earth (as plants)
71|18|Later, He will return you to earth, and then He will bring you (back to life) out (of this very earth)
71|19|Allah has laid the earth out for you as a wide expanse
71|20|So you move about in this world, over highways and mountain passes
71|21|Nooh said, "My Lord, they have really disobeyed me; they have followed the ones whose wealth and offspring have merely served to (multiply and) increase their loss
71|22|They have hatched a mighty awesome scheme
71|23|They said (to their followers), ´Do not ever give up your gods. Never ever abandon (the worship of) Wada, Suwa, Yaguth, and nasr´ _(all names of idols being worshipped)
71|24|These idols have led many astray. (Surely), You let (no one but) the evil doers increase (and advance) in misguidance
71|25|Because of their sins, they were drowned and then cast into the fire. They did not find any helpers to save them from Allah
71|26|Nooh prayed, "My Lord, do not leave any one of them (alive) on (the surface of) the earth
71|27|Indeed, if You spare them, they may lead Your servants astray. They will beget only (intransigent) sinners and unbelievers
71|28|My Lord, forgive me, my parents, and anyone who enters my home as a believer. (Forgive) the believing men and the believing women, and do not increase the evil doers in anything but doom and destruction
72|1|Say, "It has been revealed to me that a (small) group of jinn heard (the Quran) and reported (it to its nation), ´We just heard a wonderful recital.´
72|2|It guides towards the right path. We believe in it, and we shall (now) never associate anyone with our Lord
72|3|Indeed, He _ Exalted and Majestic as He is _ did not (ever) take a mate or a son
72|4|The foolish among us, used to utter atrocious lies about Allah
72|5|We thought (and wrongly assumed) that human beings and jinn could not utter false statements about Allah
72|6|Some of the human beings used to invoke the support (and protection) of some (individuals among the jinn). (But) the jinn merely increased the (confusion and) disbelief of man
72|7|And people thought _ as you did _ that Allah will not resurrect anyone
72|8|We scanned (and surveyed) the sky and found it teaming with watchful guards and flaming meteors
72|9|Indeed, we used to seek places (in the sky) to sit and eavesdrop (on the angels). But now whoever attempts to eavesdrop finds a flaming meteor lurking around (to strike him)
72|10|Of course, we did not know whether a (cosmic) calamity has been planned for those on earth, or that their Lord intends to reveal to them the right path
72|11|Among us (jinn), there are some that are righteous, and others that are quite the opposite. We follow diverse (and divergent) paths
72|12|We have come to realize that we will never (be able to) evade Allah on earth. Nor can we ever evade Him if we run away (and leave the earth)
72|13|In fact, when we heard the guidance, we believed it. Thus, whoever believes in his Lord never needs to worry about his (good) deeds losing their worth. Nor shall he ever fear an injustice
72|14|Indeed, some of us (have surrendered and) are obedient, while others have deviated (from the right path). In fact, those accepting Islam (as their way of life) are really the ones seeking the right path
72|15|Those who have deviated from the right path would serve as fuel (and firewood) for hell
72|16|Had they stood firm upon the way (of Islam), We would (surely) have supplied them with abundant (rain) water
72|17|To test them with! The Lord will immerse into an ever worsening torment, all those who turn away from the remembrance of their Lord
72|18|The masjids, (the mosques), are for (the worship of) Allah. So do not invoke others along with Allah
72|19|When the servant of Allah, (Muhammad, SAW), rose to invoke Him, they (resisted and) almost stifled him with their crowds
72|20|Say, "I shall pray (only) to my Lord and I shall not associate anyone with Him
72|21|Say, "I really have no power to cause you any harm, nor (to make you follow) the right path
72|22|Say, "No one can protect me against Allah. If (I do) not (get an asylum with Him), I will not find a place of refuge (anywhere)
72|23|(My mission is nothing) except to convey the revelations of Allah _ His messages. The fire of hell is for the one who disobeys Allah and His messenger. (That one) will stay there for ever
72|24|(Let them wait) till they witness that which they have been promised. Very soon, they will find out whose supporters are weaker and fewer in numbers
72|25|Say, "I do not know if the promised punishment is (to occur in the) near (future), or if my Lord will set a distant date for it
72|26|(Allah is) the Knower of the unseen; He does not divulge His secrets to anyone
72|27|Except to whomever He chooses among His messengers. (When He reveals the unseen to a messenger), He appoints (angels as) observers in front of and behind him
72|28|In order to monitor how the Messenger conveys the message of his Lord. He (Allah) surrounds (with his Knowledge and Power) everything that exists around them. (He knows everything)! He has counted up every single thing
73|1|Oh you, (Muhammad, SAW), bundled up in clothes
73|2|(Arise and) stand (in ´salat´) during the night, save a little while
73|3|Half (the night), or a little less than that
73|4|Or, (make it) a little more (than half); and recite the Qur´an distinctly and in a slow sing-song chant
73|5|Indeed, soon We will lay upon you a profound statement, (and entrust you with a momentous mission)
73|6|Indeed, during the (pre dawn) hours of the night, the perception is keener and the speech more effective (and clearer)
73|7|You have ordinary chores to perform during the day
73|8|So, (at night), remember the name of your Lord and worship Him (exclusively) with sincerity and devotion
73|9|(He is) the Lord of the East and the West. There is no god but He! So accept Him as your guardian
73|10|And patiently endure what they utter, and part company with them in a handsome and polite manner
73|11|And, leave Me to handle (all) those who deny (the truth), those (who happen to be) living in peace and comfort. Let them, for a while
73|12|For them, We have shackles and the raging fire (and)
73|13|The food that chokes, and a painful punishment
73|14|(Let them be) then, till that day when the earth and the mountains would rock and reel violently. The mountains would turn into heaps of loosely packed sand
73|15|Of course, We have sent a messenger towards you to bear witness against you, just as We sent a messenger towards the pharaoh
73|16|But the pharaoh defied the messenger, and so We seized him with virulent consequences
73|17|If you defy and disobey, how would you go through (the frightful terror of) the Day (of Judgment), which would turn even the children gray (with horror)
73|18|(On that day), the sky will burst asunder; His promise is (simply) bound to be fulfilled
73|19|This (Qur´an) is indeed a reminder. (Now), whoever wants, may take the road that leads towards his Lord
73|20|Of course, Allah knows that you, and some of those with you, do stand (in ´salat´) close to two-thirds of the night. Sometimes half the night and sometimes close to one-third (of the night). Allah keeps the count of the day and the night (precisely). He knows that you cannot (always) keep time (so accurately). So He has turned to you with kindness and grace. You may recite as much of the Qur´an as you easily can. He knows that (at any given time) some of you would be sick, and others would be travelling in search of Allah´s bounties. Still others would be (engaged in) fighting for the cause of Allah. So recite as much of the Qur´an as you can, establish the ´salat´, pay the ´zakat´ and advance the virtuous loan to Allah. Whatever good deeds you send ahead for yourself are there with Allah. You will receive the rewards for your deeds (on the Day of Judgment), far better and bigger (than your deeds deserve). Seek the forgiveness of Allah, for Allah is oft-Forgiving, the most Merciful
74|1|Oh you, wrapped up (in a cloak)
74|2|Get up and warn (people)
74|3|And announce that your Lord is the Greatest
74|4|Cleanse and keep your clothes purified
74|5|And keep clear away from filth
74|6|Do not seek worldly gains (in return) for favors done
74|7|Endure (adversity) with patience, for the sake of your Lord
74|8|(Warn everyone that) the day the trumpet sounds
74|9|Would truly be a long hard day
74|10|Not at all an easy day for the unbelievers
74|11|So, let Me handle the one whom I created all alone
74|12|And, I granted him wealth (and resources) in abundance
74|13|And sons to stand by him
74|14|I made life comfortable and easy for him
74|15|Yet, he (greedily) desires that I should grant him still more
74|16|Of course not! Indeed, he was obstinate (and ardent) in opposing Our verses
74|17|Soon, I will impose a dreadful torment upon him
74|18|Indeed, he pondered and plotted
74|19|Cursed is he, the plot he hatched
74|20|Once again, damned is he! What a plot he hatched
74|21|Then, he looked around (haughtily)
74|22|Frowned, and signaled his displeasure
74|23|Finally, he turned back and displayed arrogance
74|24|Then said, "It is nothing but (the same old) magic handed down from antiquity
74|25|It, (the Qur´an), is merely the word of a mortal
74|26|Soon, I will fling him (and roast him) in that scorcher _ (the hell)
74|27|And what do you think the scorcher is
74|28|It would not spare (anything or anyone), nor would it leave them alone (by finishing them off)
74|29|It will (scorch and) shrivel the human flesh
74|30|And over that (scorcher) are nineteen (angels standing guard)
74|31|We have chosen to appoint the angels as wardens over hell, and We let their number be a trial for the unbelievers. So that, those given the scriptures may believe, and the believers may increase in their belief. Both _ those given the scriptures and the believers _ may not entertain doubts. Yet, those with disease in their hearts, and the unbelievers, would still say, "What does Allah mean by this example?" Thus, Allah leads astray whom He wants, and guides whom He wants. No one knows the forces of Allah except He. This is nothing but a reminder for the mortals
74|32|No! (I) swear by the moon
74|33|The night, as it retreats
74|34|And the dawn as it glows
74|35|Indeed, it (hell) is surely one of the mightiest (signs)
74|36|A warning for the mortals
74|37|(Now), anyone of you who wishes may proceed (towards excellence), or lag behind
74|38|Every soul is (mortgaged and) held (as security) against the (evil) deeds it has wrought
74|39|Except (the righteous ones), those on the right hand
74|40|(They would be) in the paradise; (and) they shall ask
74|41|The criminals
74|42|What has caused you to end up in this scorcher
74|43|They would reply, "We were not among those who established the ´salat´
74|44|Nor among those who fed (and cared for) the poor and the destitute
74|45|(Instead), we joined those who indulged in idle prattle (against the truth)
74|46|And we denied the (coming of the) Day of Judgment
74|47|Till the inevitable (death) came upon us
74|48|So, the intercession of the mediators did not help them at all
74|49|What is the matter with them? They are turning away from the reminder
74|50|As if they were startled donkeys
74|51|Running away from a lion
74|52|In fact, each one of them wants to be handed over his (very own customized) scriptures all spread out
74|53|Not ever! The fact is, they do not fear the afterlife
74|54|No! In fact, this (Qur´an) is (just) an admonition
74|55|(Now) whoever wants, may heed (its warning)
74|56|But they will not heed unless Allah so wills. He is Worthy of being feared, and He is the One Who forgives
75|1|No, I swear by the day of Resurrection
75|2|And no, I swear by the censuring voice of conscience
75|3|Does man suppose that We would not (be able to) put his bones (back) together
75|4|Indeed, We have the power to (mold and) sculpt (even) his finger tips in perfect proportions
75|5|Actually, man (just) wants to keep on sinning
75|6|(So) he asks (derisively), "When is the day of resurrection
75|7|(It will occur) when the sight becomes dazed (in a stupor)
75|8|And the moon turns lightless
75|9|And the sun and the moon are made to run into each other
75|10|On that day, man will say, "Where is the refuge
75|11|Not at all! There is no refuge
75|12|The ultimate abode, (the journey´s end), is with your Lord today
75|13|That day (each) man will be apprised of everything he sent forward, as well as everything he held back
75|14|In fact, man (really) has an insight into his (own) self
75|15|Even though he makes up excuses
75|16|Do not move your tongue hurriedly (in an attempt) to hasten the (revelation of the) Qur´an
75|17|Indeed, it is Our responsibility to have it collected (compiled) and read (as a book)
75|18|Therefore, follow the recital (attentively), as We recite the Qur´an to you
75|19|It is (also) Our responsibility to explain to you its meaning
75|20|No (oh people), in fact you (just) love the transient life (of this world)
75|21|While you forsake the afterlife
75|22|That day, some faces would be radiant
75|23|Looking at their Lord (in anticipation)
75|24|While (some) faces that day, would be gloomy and sullen
75|25|Convinced that a cataclysmic catastrophe would soon strike them
75|26|No! In fact when the soul (heaves up and) reaches the collar bone (as it exits the body)
75|27|And (after) it has been asked, "Any miracle worker? (Can anyone help)
75|28|And the (dying) man knows that it is farewell
75|29|Then, the shin will twine around its twin _ (the other shin)
75|30|And events will then progress towards your Lord
75|31|So, he refused to affirm, and did not perform the ´salat´
75|32|Instead, he rejected the truth and turned away
75|33|Then vainly and haughtily, he walked back to his family
75|34|Misery is for you. Misery
75|35|Yes, of course! Misery is for you. Misery
75|36|Did man think that he would be left unchecked, (and never be called to account)
75|37|Was he not (just) an ejected drop of semen
75|38|Then, he became a clot, and He (Allah) gave him the form and proportions
75|39|And from the clot, He created two sexes _ male and female
75|40|Isn´t such (a Mighty) being, (the Almighty), capable of bringing the dead back to life
76|1|Was there (ever) a period of time when man was not worth a mention
76|2|We have certainly created man from a drop of mixed semen, (in order) to test him. Therefore, We made him capable of hearing and seeing
76|3|Indeed, We (also) showed man the (right) path. (Now), he may either (accept and) be grateful, or reject (and be ungrateful)
76|4|We have certainly prepared chains, shackles and the blazing fire for the unbelievers
76|5|While the righteous ones would get to drink from cups filled with camphor flavored wine
76|6|(Gushing from) the springs. The servants of Allah will drink right from it. They would channel the springs with ease
76|7|(Because they) fulfill (their) vows, and fear the day of widespread disaster
76|8|And for the sake of His love, they feed the poor (and needy), the orphans and the captives
76|9|(They say), "For the sake of Allah, we feed you. We do not expect anything from you in return, not even thanks
76|10|In fact, we fear a dreary day of affliction from our Lord, a very long day (indeed)
76|11|But, Allah will protect them from the evil (and torture) of such a day; He would grant them the glow of beauty and joy
76|12|The paradise _ and (a wardrobe of) fine silk (garments) _ would be their reward for what they patiently endured
76|13|In the paradise, they would recline (and relax) on couches. (There), they shall neither be troubled by the heat of the sun, nor by the excessive biting cold
76|14|The shades of paradise would (shield them and) cover them all around. The cluster of fruit would droop low, within easy reach
76|15|Silver goblets, and clear crystal glasses would be circulated among them
76|16|Goblets made of crystal clear silver would be filled to measure, as per their wishes
76|17|In paradise, they would be given a cup (of wine) to drink; it would have the flavor of ginger
76|18|The spring (of wine) in paradise is called ´The salsabeel´
76|19|Youthful lads, staying young forever, would (go around and) wait on them. (So handsome), you would take them for scattered pearls when you see them
76|20|In the paradise, you will find (the idyllic bliss and) blessings everywhere; splendors of the great empire
76|21|They will wear green garments made of fine silk and rich brocade. They shall don silver (arm bands and) bracelets as adornments. Their Lord will give them a pure (refreshing) drink
76|22|(They shall hear), "This is really your reward. Your efforts (in life) have found acceptance (and borne fruit in the afterlife)
76|23|Indeed, it is We Who revealed to you the Qur´an in stages, a little at a time
76|24|Therefore, submit to the commands of your Lord, patiently. And do not obey the sinners, the unbelievers among them
76|25|And remember your Lord´s name, each morning and evening
76|26|Prostrate before Him during part of the night. Chant His praises during the long hours of the night
76|27|In fact, the unbelievers love the present (transient) life, the one easy to earn (and attain), while they put behind (and out of their mind), the remembrance of a grievous onerous day
76|28|It is We Who created them. We gave them their strength and vigor. Whenever We wish, We can replace them all together. We can easily bring in their place others like them
76|29|Indeed, this (Qur´an) is a reminder! (Now), whoever wishes may follow the path (that leads) to his Lord
76|30|But you cannot will anything, unless Allah wills it so. Indeed, Allah is all-Knowing, all-Wise
76|31|He ushers into His mercy whomever He wills. For the evil doers, He has prepared a painful punishment
77|1|(I swear by the wind) that is sent in waves, and buffets gently
77|2|And the violent wind that raises storms
77|3|Then, scatters things around
77|4|And splits them asunder
77|5|And instills (in man) the remembrance (of Allah)
77|6|As a plea, and as a warning
77|7|What you are being promised, (the Day of Decision), will very surely occur
77|8|(It will occur) when the stars lose their luster
77|9|The sky bursts asunder
77|10|The mountains (blow up and) crumble
77|11|And when all the messengers are summoned (to bear witness)
77|12|Until what day has it been put off
77|13|Till the Day of Decision
77|14|And what do you suppose is the Day of Decision
77|15|Misery that day is for those who (dispute and) deny (the truth)
77|16|Did We not wipe out the unbelievers of earlier times
77|17|We will make (the unbelievers of) the later generations follow (the same fate as that of) the earlier ones
77|18|This is what We do to the criminals
77|19|Misery that day is for those who (dispute and) deny (the truth)
77|20|Did We not create you from a (tiny) drop of filthy fluid
77|21|Which We lodged in a secure and stable setting
77|22|For a known period
77|23|This is what We destined! How very excellent is Our destiny
77|24|Misery that day is for those who (dispute and) deny (the truth)
77|25|Did We not appoint the earth to accommodate
77|26|The living, and the dead
77|27|And on the earth, We placed the high mountains; and We gave you sweet water to drink
77|28|Misery that day is for those who (dispute and) deny (the truth)
77|29|(They would be told), "Proceed now and enter (hell), the very thing you used to deny (so vehemently)
77|30|Proceed under the three-pronged shadow
77|31|It neither provides the cool shade, nor lends protection against the (fierce) flames
77|32|Indeed, it will hurl sparks as tall as a (lofty) palace
77|33|Which would look like yellow camels
77|34|Misery that day is for those who (dispute and) deny (the truth)
77|35|Nothing will they say that day
77|36|Nor would they be allowed to offer excuses (and explanations)
77|37|Misery that day is for those who (dispute and) deny (the truth)
77|38|This is the Day of Decision. (Today) We have assembled all of you together, along with (all) the earlier generations
77|39|If you have a trick left (up your sleeves), play it now! Outwit Me
77|40|Misery that day is for those who (dispute and) deny (the truth)
77|41|The pious ones (that day) would be amidst cool shades, fountains
77|42|And fruits of their choice
77|43|Eat and drink, and relish your rewards! (It is yours) in return for what you used to do
77|44|This is really how We reward the righteous
77|45|Misery that day is for those who (dispute and) deny (the truth)
77|46|(Oh unbelievers)! Eat and enjoy (your possessions) just a little while longer. Indeed, you are the criminals
77|47|Misery that day is for those who (dispute and) deny (the truth)
77|48|When asked to kneel (before their Lord), they refused
77|49|Misery that day is for those who (dispute and) deny (the truth)
77|50|So, after this (Qur´an), is there any other discourse they can (accept and) believe
78|1|What are they asking each other about
78|2|The awesome news (of the afterlife)
78|3|About which they have (many doubts, discords and) disagreements
78|4|By no means! They shall soon find out
78|5|Indeed! They shall soon find out
78|6|Have We not laid out the earth as a cradle
78|7|And (nailed) the Mountains (down) as pegs
78|8|We created you all in pairs
78|9|We created sleep for you to rest (and rejuvenate)
78|10|We made the night (dark as) a cloak (that conceals and covers)
78|11|And We made the day (bright) for (you to earn your) livelihood
78|12|And We arranged seven (solid and) strong (cosmic systems) over you
78|13|And We set up (the sun as) a bright and blazing lamp
78|14|And We sent down plenty of water from the rain clouds
78|15|To produce with it, the grains and the plants
78|16|And lush and luxurious gardens
78|17|Certainly! The Day of Decision is a (destined and) definite day
78|18|You will all emerge in droves on the day the trumpet sounds
78|19|And the heavens would be (uncovered and) opened, as if it had (many wide-open) gates
78|20|And the mountains would be (dislodged and) set in motion; they would look like a mirage, (an illusion)
78|21|Hell, in fact, lies in ambush
78|22|For the transgressors, it will become the (abiding) abode
78|23|In it, they will stay for a long stretch of time
78|24|There they will not ever taste, much less drink, anything cool
78|25|(They will drink) only boiling-hot water, and pus (from wounds)
78|26|An apt and apposite outcome
78|27|Indeed, never did they anticipate a reckoning
78|28|And falsely did they oppose Our verses (and signs)
78|29|We have recorded every single thing in a book
78|30|Now taste (the consequences of your deeds)! Suffering is all We shall ever bestow _ and increase _ upon you
78|31|The triumphant finale shall belong to the pious
78|32|The orchards and the vineyards
78|33|And blossoming buxom belle _ (the well matched maidens) _ as mates
78|34|And the brimful cups (of wine)
78|35|Inane nonsense talk and (false) gossip, they shall not hear in paradise
78|36|Compensation from your Lord, a bountiful and generous grant
78|37|Before Rehman _ the Lord of the heavens and the earth, and everything between them _ they won´t dare to speak
78|38|On that day, all souls and all angels shall stand (before Him) in rows. No one shall dare to speak unless Rehman grants permission, and on condition that he will speak only what is proper
78|39|Such is the day of the truth! (It is sure to arrive). Now, whoever wishes may seek the course towards his Lord
78|40|We have certainly warned you of the (imminent and) impending doom. On that day, man would look at the deeds he had sent ahead; he would say, "Alas! if I were only dust
79|1|(I swear by the angels) _ those who (violently) wrench out (the souls of the unbelievers)
79|2|And those who (gently) draw out (the souls of the believers)
79|3|Those who swiftly glide along (in the universe)
79|4|Those who rush to carry out
79|5|And execute the commands (of the Lord)
79|6|That day, (the Day of Decision), a violent jolt will rock (the earth)
79|7|And another (jolt) will (soon) follow
79|8|That day, hearts would pound (in panic)
79|9|And eyes would drift downward (with dread)
79|10|They are saying, "What? Would we really be restored back to our former (state of) existence
79|11|Even after we are (just) crumbling bones
79|12|They say, "Such a (revival and) recurrence is hence a losing proposition
79|13|(In fact), it will just take a single rebuke
79|14|And at once they will appear on the surface
79|15|Has the story of Musa reached you
79|16|His Lord summoned him to the holy valley of ´Tuwa´
79|17|(And said), "Go to the pharaoh, he is really rebellious
79|18|And ask him, "Are you willing to accept purity
79|19|(If so), I will guide you towards your Lord; fear Him
79|20|And Musa showed him the great sign
79|21|But the pharaoh denied and disobeyed
79|22|And turned back to hatch a scheme
79|23|Then he assembled (his cronies) and announced
79|24|He said, "I am your Lord, the most high
79|25|So, (as a punishment), Allah turned him into an example in the afterlife, as well as in this life
79|26|Of course, there is a lesson in it for all who fear (the reckoning)
79|27|(Oh mankind)! Are you the harder to create, or is it the heavens which He built
79|28|He raised its vault high, and gave it balance
79|29|He imbued the night with darkness, and drew out its morning (glow)
79|30|And after that, He spread out the earth
79|31|He drafted off its water and produced the fodder
79|32|And He fixed the mountains firmly
79|33|(All that) for your needs, and those of your livestock
79|34|When that most grievous disaster befalls
79|35|Man, that day, shall recall all he ever (stood and) strove for
79|36|And the hell shall (loom large, and) be made visible to all
79|37|Anyone who transgressed (and rebelled)
79|38|And preferred the life of this world (to the afterlife)
79|39|Would really have hell for a home
79|40|While anyone who feared having to stand before his Lord (for a reckoning), and guarded himself against (the base and banal) desires
79|41|Would certainly have the paradise for a home
79|42|(Oh prophet), they ask you about the hour (of Judgment), "When will that (hour) come to pass
79|43|It is not for you to forecast the (actual) date (of its occurrence)
79|44|That (knowledge) rests solely with your Lord
79|45|You are there to warn anyone who fears (that day)
79|46|When they see that day, it will actually be like they have lived (in this world) for just one morning, or a single afternoon
80|1|He frowned and turned his face away
80|2|Because a blind man came to him (and interrupted him)
80|3|You don´t really know! Perhaps he would (shed his disbelief, and) grow in faith
80|4|He might heed (the warning); perhaps the reminder would benefit him
80|5|(Instead), the one who displays indifference
80|6|You attend to
80|7|It is not your failing if he fails to cleanse (himself of disbelief)
80|8|But, from the one who seeks you eagerly
80|9|And fears (Allah)
80|10|You divert your attention away
80|11|No, in fact this _ (the Qur´an) _ is a reminder
80|12|Anyone who cares, may heed
80|13|(It is inscribed) in the honored record
80|14|Sublime and held in high esteem
80|15|Set down by scribes
80|16|Noble and virtuous
80|17|Man be damned! How ungrateful is he
80|18|What was it, from which He created man
80|19|From semen! He created man, then assigned his nature
80|20|Then, He made the path (of righteousness) easy for him
80|21|Then He gave him death, and sent him to his grave
80|22|And then He will, whenever He wills, bring him back to life
80|23|No! Man did not do what Allah commanded him to do
80|24|Let man look at (the source of) his food
80|25|(To produce his food), We pour down plenty of water
80|26|(Then) We split the ground and lay it open
80|27|And out of it, We cause the grain to sprout
80|28|And the grapes and vegetables
80|29|The olives and dates
80|30|Woodland with dense foliage
80|31|And the fruits and fodder
80|32|Such is your, and your livestock´s sustenance
80|33|When the deafening blare (of the trumpet) sounds
80|34|Man will run away from his brother that day
80|35|And his mother and father
80|36|And his wife and son
80|37|Everyone that day would have far too many concerns (of his own), to care about others
80|38|Some faces that day, would glow
80|39|(With) happiness and joyful ecstasy
80|40|While some faces that day would be covered with (grim and grimy) shades
80|41|And overwhelmed by darkness
80|42|Such would be the unbelievers, the obstinate (sinners)
81|1|When the sun (and the solar system) is wrapped up
81|2|And the stars are rendered dim and dusty
81|3|And the mountains are (dislodged and) set in motion
81|4|And the pregnant camel is left unattended (by its owner)
81|5|And the beasts are herded up
81|6|And oceans boil and brim over
81|7|(That would be the day) when souls would rejoin their bodies
81|8|And the infant girl who was buried alive, would be asked
81|9|What was her sin? Why was she killed
81|10|When the record (of deeds) is laid open
81|11|And the sky is stripped bare
81|12|And the hellfire is set ablaze
81|13|And the paradise is brought closer
81|14|(That day), each soul shall learn what (deeds) it has brought along
81|15|No, (I swear) by the planets
81|16|And the stars that rise and set
81|17|And the night as it departs
81|18|And the dawn that breathes (anew)
81|19|Of course, this (Qur´an) is really the word brought by the noble messenger _ (the angel, Gibrael)
81|20|The one who has power and high rank with the Lord of the throne
81|21|(The one who is) obeyed, and is furthermore, trustworthy
81|22|(Oh people)! your companion is not crazy
81|23|He most definitely saw (the angel, Gibrael) on the clear horizon
81|24|And he is not stingy about (disclosing the knowledge of) the unseen
81|25|It is not the word of the cursed Shaitan
81|26|So, where to, are you headed
81|27|This is not anything other than the reminder for the entire world
81|28|For every single one of you, anyone who wishes to walk upright along the straight path
81|29|But the wishes of any of you do not matter, unless Allah, the Lord of the universe, wills it too
82|1|When the sky is split asunder
82|2|And the stars are strewn around
82|3|And the oceans spill forth
82|4|And the graves are overturned (and emptied)
82|5|(That is the day when) every soul would learn everything it did, that which it sent ahead, and that which it left behind
82|6|(Oh people)! What has lured you away from your Lord, the most Eminent, the Generous
82|7|The One Who created you, fashioned you, and gave you (the right) proportions
82|8|In whatever form He willed, He brought you into being
82|9|No! Rather, you deny the (day of) reward and punishment
82|10|Indeed, to watch over you (and record) are
82|11|The noble scribes, (the angels)
82|12|They know everything you do
82|13|Of course, the pious would be in bliss
82|14|And the wicked would surely be in hellfire
82|15|They shall join it on the Day of Judgment
82|16|And (thereafter) they shall never (be allowed to) remain absent from it
82|17|What can make you grasp the reality of the Day of Judgment
82|18|(Think) again! What can make you grasp the reality of the Day of Judgment
82|19|That day, no soul shall have any power to do anything at all for anyone else. That day, the command will belong to Allah (exclusively)
83|1|Woe to those who weigh and measure less
83|2|Those who insist upon receiving the full measure, when they are the ones receiving
83|3|But when they measure and weigh for others, they (short change and) give less than due
83|4|Do such people not think that they are going to be resurrected
83|5|On an awesome day
83|6|That day, all mankind shall stand before the Lord of the universe
83|7|Of course not! The book of deeds of the wicked ones is (preserved) in the "Sijjin" _ (the vault)
83|8|And how would you know what ´Sijjin´ is
83|9|(It is) a book inscribed
83|10|Misery that day is for those who belie (the truth)
83|11|Those who dispute (and refute) the Day of Judgment
83|12|No one disputes it except all the sinful obstinate transgressors
83|13|When Our verses are recited to them they say, "Fables of the earlier people
83|14|Of course not! Rather, all (the filth) they have earned has rusted and encrusted their hearts
83|15|Of course not! In fact, on that day they would be shut out from the Mercy of their Lord
83|16|Then, they shall burn in hell
83|17|And they would be told, "This is precisely what you used to deny
83|18|While the record of deeds of the virtuous is (preserved) in the ´Illiyeen´ _ (the register of the exalted)
83|19|And how would you know what ´Illiyeen´ is
83|20|(It is) a book inscribed
83|21|Those nearest (to Allah, the angels) will attest to it
83|22|The righteous ones would be in bliss
83|23|Seated on thrones, looking on
83|24|You would notice a blissful radiance on their faces
83|25|To drink, they would be given the sealed wine, the choicest and the purest
83|26|Musk shall be its seal! Those wishing to excel, should excel at this
83|27|Its flavor and essence shall consist of ´Tasneem´
83|28|A spring! Those closest (to Allah, the righteous ones) would drink from (this spring)
83|29|In fact the criminals, the unbelievers, used to laugh at those who believed
83|30|As they passed by the believers, they would wink at each other (jokingly)
83|31|And when they returned to their family, they returned jesting (and grinning)
83|32|Whenever they saw the believers, they said, "These are the people gone astray
83|33|The unbelievers were not sent as guardians over the believers
83|34|So today, it is the believers´ turn to laugh at the unbelievers
83|35|(The believers would be sitting) on elevated thrones, looking on
83|36|Now, have the unbelievers not been paid in full for what they did
84|1|When the sky splits apart
84|2|And heeds its Lord´s command, as it truly must
84|3|When the earth distends
84|4|Casts off its contents, and becomes bare and blank
84|5|It will heed its Lord´s command, as it truly must
84|6|Oh man! Indeed, you are steadily advancing towards your Lord. You shall meet Him
84|7|Then, the one who is given his record (of deeds) in his right (hand)
84|8|Will truly face a light (and lenient) reckoning
84|9|And will happily return to his folks
84|10|But the one who is given his record of deed behind his back
84|11|Will call for (his own) death
84|12|But will roast in the fiery blaze
84|13|(In his life), he had been happy (and contented) among his kin
84|14|And (spuriously) assumed that he would never have to come back (to his Lord)
84|15|Why not? His Lord was (always) watching all his deeds
84|16|No! Really, I swear by the sunset glow
84|17|And the night, and everything it enshrouds
84|18|And the moon when it is full
84|19|You would definitely move along, from one stage to another
84|20|What is with them? Why don´t they believe
84|21|When the Qur´an is recited before them, why do they not fall prostrate
84|22|Instead, the unbelievers refuse to accept
84|23|Indeed, Allah (alone) knows what (kind of) deeds they collect
84|24|So give them the news of a painful punishment
84|25|(Which will strike all), except those who believe and perform righteous deeds. For them, there exists an unrestricted, ever-lasting reward
85|1|(I swear) by the sky, with (all) its constellations
85|2|(And by) the promised day (of Judgment)
85|3|And (by) the witness (bearing the evidence), as well as the evidence (itself)
85|4|Doomed are the people of the ditch
85|5|(The ditch) full of fire and abundant fuel
85|6|Remember, when the unbelievers sat by the fire
85|7|And were themselves witness to what they did to the believers
85|8|They were hostile (and rancorous), just because the believers believed in Allah, the most Powerful and the most Praiseworthy
85|9|To Whom belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth. Allah is the Witness to every single thing
85|10|Indeed, those who persecuted the believing men and women and then failed to repent, would (certainly) face the torture of hell. For them, is the punishment of the blazing fire
85|11|While the (blissful) paradise _ rivers run right through it _ is for those who believe and do righteous deeds. That is the greatest triumph
85|12|Your Lord´s punishment is very severe, indeed
85|13|It is He Who created; and He it is, Who will recreate
85|14|He is the most Forgiving and the most Loving
85|15|Owner of the majestic throne
85|16|(The Efficient Achiever)! He does what He pleases
85|17|Has the story of the armies reached you
85|18|(Armies of) the pharaoh and the (people of) ´Samood´
85|19|The unbelievers, in fact (were and) are (persistent) in their denial
85|20|Allah has surrounded them all around
85|21|This (narrative) is certainly the majestic Qur´an
85|22|Safely preserved on (the sacred) slates
86|1|(I swear) by the sky, and the night star
86|2|And how would you know what the night star is
86|3|(It is) a bright star
86|4|There is no soul without a guardian over it
86|5|Let man look at (and bear in mind) the substance he is created from
86|6|(He is) created from the surging fluid
86|7|Which springs from between the spine and the ribs
86|8|Indeed, He is (certainly) capable of bringing man back to life
86|9|That day, (all) secrets would be laid bare
86|10|(That day), man shall not have any strength, nor any helpers
86|11|(I swear) by the sky that repeatedly sends rain down
86|12|And by the earth that splits (and lets plants emerge)
86|13|Indeed, this Qur´an is the statement that sifts (right from wrong)
86|14|It is not an idle tale
86|15|They are hatching a nefarious plot
86|16|But I, too, shall devise a scheme
86|17|So give the unbelievers a little respite. Deal with them gently for a while
87|1|Glorify the name of your Lord, the most High
87|2|The One Who created (everything), then (fashioned and) set everything right
87|3|Assigned (everything its) nature, then guided it along
87|4|The One Who produces the fodder
87|5|Then turns it into the decaying scum
87|6|(Oh prophet)! We would enable you to recite (the Qur´an). Then, you will not forget (anything)
87|7|Except whatever Allah wills. Indeed, He knows the apparent, as well as the concealed
87|8|And We will make it easy for you (to adopt) the easy way
87|9|So remind (men), for reminder surely helps
87|10|The one who fears, will surely heed
87|11|And the wretched will stay aloof
87|12|And then he will roast in the mammoth fire
87|13|Where he shall never die; nor be alive
87|14|Successful has been the one who purified himself
87|15|And, remembered the name of his Lord and performed the ´salat´
87|16|No! In fact, (most of) you prefer the life of this world
87|17|Although the hereafter _ (the life-to-come) _ is far superior and more enduring
87|18|Certainly, this (is what) was (written) in the earlier scriptures
87|19|The scriptures of Ibraheem and Musa
88|1|Has the news of that overwhelming (calamity) reached you
88|2|(Many) faces that day would be (panic struck and) down cast
88|3|Weary and toiling
88|4|Burning in the scorching fire
88|5|Made to drink from the boiling spring
88|6|And having nothing to eat, except (the bitter thorny) cactus
88|7|Not enough to nourish or curb the hunger
88|8|(Other) faces that day would be happy (and blissful)
88|9|Well pleased with (the outcome of) their efforts
88|10|In the exalted paradise
88|11|There, they shall hear nothing vile or foolish
88|12|In paradise, there are gushing springs
88|13|And elevated thrones
88|14|And carved (exotic) goblets
88|15|And cushions set in rows
88|16|And spread out (lush rich) carpets
88|17|Do they not look at the camel (and wonder)? How (superbly) is it created
88|18|And at the sky; how (high) is it raised
88|19|And at the mountains; how (firmly) are they planted
88|20|And at the earth; how (wide) is it spread out
88|21|So, (continue to) remind (them). Indeed, you are (a messenger) to remind (them)
88|22|You are not (appointed) a warden over them
88|23|As for the one who turns away and disbelieves
88|24|Allah will punish him with the direst torment
88|25|Of course, back to Us is their return (journey)
88|26|Indeed, to call them to accounts is upon Us
89|1|(I swear by) the dawn
89|2|The ten nights (of the month of ´Hajj´)
89|3|Even and odd (numbers)
89|4|And the night as it passes
89|5|Is there a (more solemn) vow for the sensible ones
89|6|Are you not aware of what your Lord did to the (people of) ´Aads´
89|7|Those well known for the high pillars (of their architecture)
89|8|Such that the likes of them had never been raised in other cities
89|9|And (how He dealt) with the people of ´Samood´, who hollowed out huge rocks (and built palaces) in the valley
89|10|And with the pharaoh wielding the kingdom
89|11|Those who transgressed and crossed all bounds in the lands
89|12|And vastly increased mischief and corruption in the land
89|13|So your Lord unleashed upon them the scourge of suffering
89|14|Indeed, your Lord is ever so vigilant
89|15|Such is man! When his Lord puts him through a test by granting him honor and a life of ease, he says, "My Lord has honored me
89|16|And when He tests him by restricting his means of livelihood, he says, "My Lord has disgraced me
89|17|Not at all! In fact, you do not treat the orphans kindly
89|18|Nor do you encourage each other to feed the poor
89|19|Greedily, you (misappropriate and) devour the inheritance (of the weak, the widows and the orphans)
89|20|You love wealth with all your heart
89|21|No, of course not! (On the day) when the earth is pounded repeatedly and crushed
89|22|And your Lord (Himself) comes down, along with His angels ranked in rows
89|23|And (the day) the hell is brought (in view), is the day when man shall remember clearly. But rememberance then will be of no avail
89|24|Man will say, "Alas! If only I had sent ahead of me (the good deeds) for this life of mine
89|25|No one can punish (as severely) as He will, that day
89|26|No one can tie up and bind as (securely as) He will (that day)
89|27|(The righteous would be told), "Oh you, the tranquil peaceful soul
89|28|Return to your Lord contented and happy, having won His pleasure
89|29|Join My (honored) servants
89|30|And enter My (idyllic blissful) paradise
90|1|I swear by (the sanctity of) this town (of Makkah)
90|2|(Because) you (oh Muhammad, SAW), are allowed in this town
90|3|By the father (the first man, prophet Adam), and (all) the children he begot
90|4|Surely, We have fashioned man to toil (and undergo a trial)
90|5|Does man think that nobody has any power over him
90|6|(Boastfully) he says, "I have squandered heaps of wealth
90|7|Does he think nobody watches over him
90|8|Did We not give him two eyes
90|9|A tongue, and the lips
90|10|And showed him the two (divergent) paths (of good and evil)
90|11|But man does not attempt the harder (uphill course)
90|12|And how would you know what the harder course (of action) is
90|13|(It is) freeing slaves
90|14|And on a day of hunger, feeding (the hungry)
90|15|Orphans among the kinsfolk
90|16|And the needy among the destitute
90|17|Furthermore, (the harder course is) to be among those who believe and persevere (in belief), and persevere with kindness and compassion
90|18|Such are the people of the right side _ (the righteous ones)
90|19|While those who disbelieve Our verses (and Our signs) are the people of the left side _ (the rebellious ones)
90|20|Fire shall besiege and beset them, all around
91|1|(I swear) by the sun and its radiant light
91|2|And the moon that trails (and reflects) its light
91|3|By the day that reveals (the sun)
91|4|And the night that veils it
91|5|(I swear) by the sky, and (by) Him Who made it
91|6|And (by) the earth, and (by) Him Who spread it
91|7|By the soul, and by Him Who perfected it
91|8|Then, inspired in it the (conscience, the sense of) wrong and right
91|9|Successful is the one, who (nurtured and) purified (his soul)
91|10|A (dismal) failure is the one who (suppressed and) debased (his soul)
91|11|The (people of) ´Samood´ denied (the truth) with utter arrogance
91|12|The meanest among them was dispatched
91|13|(Against) the messenger of Allah (who) warned them saying, "(Do not attack) this camel of Allah; let it (roam and) drink (freely)
91|14|But they refused, and slashed its hamstring. Therefore, as a consequence of their sins, their Lord destroyed them completely; He totally demolished their dwellings
91|15|For He does not fear (any) consequence
92|1|(I swear) by the night as it veils (the earth in darkness)
92|2|And the day, as it unveils
92|3|And by Him, Who created (life in pairs,) male and female
92|4|In fact your efforts pursue divergent ends
92|5|Anyone who gives charity, and fears
92|6|And believes in (basic) goodness (and morality)
92|7|For such a one, We shall facilitate the easy way, (the way to Islam)
92|8|While anyone who acts niggardly, (lives nonchalantly), and considers himself self-sufficient
92|9|And rejects the (basic) goodness (and morality)
92|10|For such a one, We shall facilitate the path of evil _ (the path that runs contrary to his nature)
92|11|How will his wealth avail him when he goes down (into the ditch, his grave)
92|12|To grace you (all) with the guidance, is upon Us
92|13|Indeed, to Us belongs the afterlife, as well as this one
92|14|I warn you (all) about the raging blaze
92|15|No one will roast in it, except the most wretched
92|16|The one who denied (the truth), and turned away
92|17|Far removed from it, would be the righteous one
92|18|The one who sought to purify ( his soul), and spent his wealth (in charity)
92|19|Not because he had any favors to return
92|20|But because he sought the pleasure of his Lord, the most High
92|21|(Such a man) would certainly be well pleased
93|1|(I swear) by the morning light
93|2|And the night, as it becomes calm
93|3|(Oh Muhammad, SAW), your Lord has not forsaken you; He is not displeased
93|4|The life to come is better for you than the earlier life
93|5|Soon, your Lord will grant you (His blessings); you shall be well-pleased
93|6|Did He not find you an orphan, and gave you shelter
93|7|He found you unguided, and guided you
93|8|Found you poor, and enriched you
93|9|So do not oppress the orphan
93|10|And do not (angrily) repulse (and rebuff) the needy, the beggar
93|11|(Rather), proclaim the favors of your Lord
94|1|(Oh Muhammad, SAW), did We not lay your chest open (and responsive to the truth)
94|2|And We lightened your burden
94|3|That bore so heavy on your back
94|4|And We raised your prestige (in the world)
94|5|The fact is: along with hardship, there is ease
94|6|No doubt, along with hardship there is ease
94|7|So, when you are done (with your daily chores), attend
94|8|And strive to please your Lord
95|1|(I swear) by the fig and the olive
95|2|And the mount Sinai
95|3|And the tranquil land (of Makkah)
95|4|We have certainly fashioned man in the finest possible form
95|5|Thereafter, We relegated him to being the lowest of the low
95|6|Except for those who believe and perform the righteous deeds! For them, there is the unrestricted unending reward
95|7|So (oh man), what makes you contradict (the truth about) the reward and punishment
95|8|Isn´t Allah absolutely the very Best of all the rulers
96|1|Read! In the name of your Lord, Who created (everything that exists)
96|2|He creates man from a clot (of blood)
96|3|Read! Your Lord is the most Generous
96|4|He it is, Who imparted knowledge by the pen
96|5|Taught man what he did not know
96|6|No, of course not! Man is surely rebellious
96|7|For, he thinks he is independent
96|8|(Even though his final) return is towards your Lord
96|9|Did you (oh Muhammad, SAW), see the one who forbids
96|10|The servant (of Allah) to perform ´salat´
96|11|What do you think? Is he well guided
96|12|And (does he) enjoin piety
96|13|Or do you think he denied and turned away
96|14|Does he not know that Allah watches (everything)
96|15|Of course not! If he did not desist, We will surely drag him by the hair on his forehead
96|16|The lying sinful lock of hair
96|17|He may then call his henchmen for help
96|18|While, We shall summon the guardians of hell
96|19|No! Beware! Do not follow such a one. (Rather), fall prostrate and draw closer (to Allah)
97|1|Certainly, We have revealed it _ (the Qur´an) _ in the Night of Decree
97|2|And what do you understand by the Night of Decree
97|3|The Night of Power is better than a thousand months
97|4|Bearing the divine decrees, the angels and the spirits descend during the night with the permission of their Lord
97|5|Blissful and serene is that night, right until the day breaks
98|1|Those of the people of the scriptures and the polytheists who do not believe, will not give up (disbelief) until the clear evidence comes to them
98|2|The messenger of Allah recites from the sacred and sanctified scripture _ (the Qur´an)
98|3|Containing sound and straightforward rules
98|4|Those given the (earlier) scriptures (argued and) differed amongst themselves after clear proofs had already come to them
98|5|What they were commanded was to worship only Allah with sincerity and exclusive devotion; and to worship nothing and nobody else with Him. (They were ordered) to establish ´salat´, and to pay the ´zakat´. That is truly the stable (and established) religion
98|6|Whoever denies among the people of the book and the polytheists, would be in the fire of hell, and would stay there forever. Such are the worst of the creation
98|7|While those who believe and do good deeds are certainly the best of the creation
98|8|Their reward, the paradise of Eden _ rivers run right through it _ is with their Lord. They shall live there forever. Allah is pleased with them, and they with Him! This is for the one who fears his Lord
99|1|When the earth is shaken up with a cataclysmic quake
99|2|And the earth yields and disgorges (all) its burden
99|3|And man remarks, "What is the matter with it
99|4|That day, it will recount all that ever occurred on it
99|5|For, your Lord shall have ordered it (to do so)
99|6|On that day, people will come out (of their graves) separately, so they may be shown (the result of) their deeds
99|7|Then, whoever did (even) an atom´s worth of good, shall see it
99|8|And whoever commits an atom´s worth of evil, shall see it
100|1|(I swear by) these panting snorting horses
100|2|Striking sparks (with their hooves)
100|3|Dashing to assault by dawn
100|4|Kicking up clouds of dust
100|5|And storming blindly into the crowds
100|6|Man is indeed ungrateful to his Lord
100|7|And to that fact, he is himself a witness
100|8|He surely loves wealth and riches with a passion
100|9|Does he not know, that when all the contents of the graves are disgorged
100|10|And all the secrets buried in the hearts are divulged
100|11|That day, (they would learn that) their Lord is thoroughly Knowledgeable about their deeds
101|1|That awesome (stunning) disaster
101|2|What is (that) awesome disaster
101|3|What do you suppose is that awesome disaster
101|4|That day, people would be like scattered (confused) moths
101|5|And the mountains like the fluffy tufts of colored wool
101|6|Anyone whose scales (of good deeds) weigh heavier
101|7|Would live in a state of bliss
101|8|As for the one whose scale (of good deeds) is lighter
101|9|An abysmal pit would totally engulf him
101|10|And what do you think is (the content of) the abysmal pit
101|11|Hot blazing fire
102|1|(Oh men! Your obsession to attain, hoard and show off) opulence diverts you (and keeps you busy)
102|2|Right until you land in (your) graves
102|3|No, surely not! You shall soon find out
102|4|Again, be sure! You shall soon find out
102|5|No, of course not! If you only knew with certainty
102|6|You shall surely see hell
102|7|Then, you would really see it with the eye of certainty
102|8|And then, you would certainly be called to account for the blessings and the bounties
103|1|(I swear) by Time
103|2|Indeed, mankind happens to be in a state of a grave loss
103|3|Except for those who believe, perform good deeds, strive for the truth, and strive with patience and perseverance
104|1|Misery is for the slanderer and the backbiter
104|2|The one who gathers wealth; and counts it (zestfully)
104|3|And thinks that his wealth confers immortality
104|4|Of course not! He will certainly be flung into the ´Wrecker´
104|5|And what do you suppose is the ´Wrecker´
104|6|(It is) the fire of Allah, kindled ablaze
104|7|Which will rise (and reach) up to (clutch) the hearts
104|8|Indeed, an inverted dome (of fire) would be (placed) upon them
104|9|Enclosed in (a fence of) tall pillars
105|1|Are you not aware of how your Lord dealt with the army accompanied by the elephants
105|2|Did He not make their (evil) plans go awry
105|3|He let loose upon them a large flock of birds
105|4|That pelted them with pellets made of baked clay
105|5|Thus, He turned them into the chewed out chaff
106|1|(The tribe of) Quraish is well known
106|2|Renowned for their summer and winter journeys
106|3|They should (devotedly) worship the Lord of this house (the ´Kaaba´ in Makkah)
106|4|Who feeds them, and protects them from (famine and) hunger. And secures them from (danger and) fear
107|1|Haven´t you seen the one who rejects the fact of the reward and punishment
107|2|He is (really) the one who (shoos and) shoves away the orphans harshly
107|3|And does not promote the feeding of the poor
107|4|Of course, misery is for (some of) those who perform ´salat´
107|5|Those among them who stay unmindful of their "salat´
107|6|Those who aim to be seen (doing good)
107|7|And they hold back even minor favors
108|1|For sure, We granted you (excellence and) abundance
108|2|So pray only to your Lord, and offer sacrifice
108|3|For anyone who hates you, will be cut off (from your Lord´s mercy)
109|1|Say, "Oh you unbelievers
109|2|That which you worship is not what I worship
109|3|And you are not going to worship the One that I worship
109|4|I shall never worship that which you serve so devotedly
109|5|Nor will you worship Whom I worship
109|6|You have your faith, and I have mine
110|1|Once Allah´s help _ and with it, the victory _ arrives
110|2|You shall see people throng (and embrace) the religion of Allah in large numbers
110|3|So chant the praises of your Lord, and beg His forgiveness. Of course, it is really He Who accepts repentance and grants forgiveness
111|1|May the hands of Abu Lahab _ (an uncle of the Prophet) _ perish; and so may he
111|2|(All) his wealth, and everything he has earned failed him
111|3|Soon, he will roast in the blazing fire
111|4|And his woman, that tale-bearing malicious gossip
111|5|Shall have a rope of palm fibers around her neck
112|1|Say "He _ (Allah) _ is One, (the most Unique)
112|2|Allah is the Self-sufficient Master _ (the Ultimate Source, the Uncaused Cause)
112|3|He did not beget, and He was not begotten
112|4|And, there is absolutely no one equal to Him; no one is even remotely comparable
113|1|Say, "I seek refuge with (Allah), the Lord of the nascent dawn
113|2|From the evil He has created
113|3|From the evil of darkness as it deepens (during the night)
113|4|From the evil of (women practicing) witchcraft, and blowing (spells) over knotted ropes
113|5|And from the evil of the grudgeful, as he turns green with jealousy
114|1|Say, "I seek refuge with the Lord of mankind
114|2|The King of mankind
114|3|The God of mankind
114|4|(I seek refuge) from the evil of the devil _ (the whispering tempter)
114|5|The one who (breathes doubts and) whispers in the hearts of mankind
114|6|Amongst the jinn and the human kind
{
    "name": "eng-drmunirmunshey",
    "author": "Dr Munir Munshey",
    "language": "English",
    "direction": "ltr",
    "source": "",
    "comments": "",
    "link": "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/fawazahmed0/quran-api@1/editions/eng-drmunirmunshey.json",
    "linkmin": "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/fawazahmed0/quran-api@1/editions/eng-drmunirmunshey.min.json"
}